Raja Yoga

Raja Yoga
by
Swami Vivekanda

1

Raja Yoga

2

Raja Yoga

Table of Contents
Prefix.................................................................................................................................... 4
Preface..................................................................................................................................6
Introductory........................................................................................................................10
The First Steps................................................................................................................... 20
Prana.................................................................................................................................. 28
The Psychic Prana.............................................................................................................. 39
References................................................................................................................ 43
The Control Of The Psychic Prana.................................................................................... 44
Pratyahara And Dharana.................................................................................................... 48
Dhyana And Samadhi........................................................................................................ 54
Raja-Yoga In Brief.............................................................................................................62
Patanjali's Yoga Aphorisms............................................................................................... 67
Introduction................................................................................................................... 67
Concentration: Its Spiritual Uses.................................................................................. 71
References................................................................................................................ 97
Concentration: Its Practice............................................................................................ 98
Powers......................................................................................................................... 124
References.............................................................................................................. 136
Independence...............................................................................................................138
References.............................................................................................................. 149
Appendix - References To Yoga......................................................................................151
Shvetashvatara Upanishad - Chapter II....................................................................... 151
Yajnavalkya quoted by Shankara [1].......................................................................... 152
Sankhya - Book III...................................................................................................... 153
Sankhya - Book IV...................................................................................................... 153
Sankhya - Book V....................................................................................................... 154
Sankhya - Book VI...................................................................................................... 154
Vyasa-Sutras - Chapter IV, Section I.......................................................................... 155
References.............................................................................................................. 155

3

Raja Yoga

Prefix

If there is such a thing as an Age of Aquarius, it began in the late 19th and 
early 20th centuries. This time period saw the birth of our modern model of 
the universe as physicists and mathemeticians looked at the world with new 
eyes. This time period also saw something of a spiritual revival in the United 
States and Europe as work in Eastern religions began to make its way into 
the public consciousness. One of the first missionaries from India came in 
1893 to the United States of America to attend, and speak at, the World 
Parliament of Religions that was taking place in Chicago in that year.

That young man, Swami Vivekananda, electrified his audience. He became 
something of a spiritual rock star of the era. Swami Vivekananda swayed an 
entire generation, both in the West and in his home country of India, with his 
lectures, books, and individual work.

This book, Raja Yoga, is one of his most influential works. When I first 
came across it in my early 20s it was a shock that set me on a path that has 
lasted my lifetime. It was my first introduction to the philosophy of Vedanta 
and the practice of meditation, practices that weren't so common in the 
1970s as they are now. It helped shaped the basic threads of my philosophy 
of life more than any other. 

The first half of the book is based on a series of lectures that Swami 
Vivekananda gave on the subject of raja yoga. It contains a great deal of 
practical information on meditation and psychology from the Vedantic point 
of view.

The second half of the book is a translation and commentary on Patanjali's 
Yoga Sutras. The practices espoused in the Yoga Sutras have been 
accepted by most, if not all, of India's schools of philosophy.

4

Raja Yoga

Raja Yoga, as with all of Swami Vivekananda's writing, is in the public 
domain. It is, however, difficult to find on the internet, except for a text 
version on Wikipedia. It is this that I have used to create this formatted 
version of the text. I trust that the book will be as useful to you as it has been 
to me.

Richard Cockrum
Shards of Consciousness
http://www.shardsofconsciousness.com

5

Raja Yoga

Preface

Since the dawn of history, various extraordinary phenomena have been 
recorded as happening amongst human beings. Witnesses are not wanting in 
modern times to attest to the fact of such events, even in societies living 
under the full blaze of modern science. The vast mass of such evidence is 
unreliable, as coming from ignorant, superstitious, or fraudulent persons. In 
many instances the so - called miracles are imitations. But what do they 
imitate? It is not the sign  of a candid and scientific mind to throw overboard 
anything without proper investigation. Surface scientists, unable to explain 
the various extraordinary mental phenomena, strive to ignore their very 
existence. They are, therefore, more culpable than those who think that their 
prayers are answered by a being, or beings, above the clouds, or than those 
who believe that their petitions will make such beings change the course of 
the universe. The latter have the excuse of ignorance, or at least of a 
defective system of education, which has taught them dependence upon such 
beings, a dependence which has become a part of their degenerate nature. 
The former have no such excuse.

For thousands of years such phenomena have been studied, investigated, and 
generalised, the whole ground of the religious faculties of man has been 
analysed, and the practical result is the science of Raja-Yoga. Raja-Yoga 
does not, after the unpardonable manner of some modern scientists, deny the 
existence of facts which are difficult to explain; on the other hand, it gently 
yet in no uncertain terms tells the superstitious that miracles, and answers to 
prayers, and powers of faith, though true as facts, are not rendered 
comprehensible through the superstitious explanation of attributing them to 
the agency of a being, or beings, above the clouds. It declares that each man 
is only a conduit for the infinite ocean of knowledge and power that lies 
behind mankind. It teaches that desires and wants are in man, that the power 
of supply is also in man; and that wherever and whenever a desire, a want, a 
prayer has been fulfilled, it was out of this infinite magazine that the supply 
came, and not from any supernatural being. The idea of supernatural beings 

6

Raja Yoga

may rouse to a certain extent the power of action in man, but it also brings 
spiritual decay. It brings dependence; it brings fear; it brings superstition. It 
degenerates into a horrible belief in the natural weakness of man. There is no 
supernatural, says the Yogi, but there are in nature gross manifestations and 
subtle manifestations. The subtle are the causes, the gross the effects. The 
gross can be easily perceived by the senses; not so the subtle. The practice of 
Raja - yoga will lead to the acquisition of the more subtle perceptions.

All the orthodox systems of India philosophy have one goal in view, the 
liberation of the soul through perfection. The method is by Yoga. The word 
Yoga covers an immense ground, but both the Sankhya and the Vedanta 
Schools point to Yoga in some form or other.

The subject of the present book is that form of Yoga known as Raja-Yoga. 
The aphorisms of Patanjali are the highest authority on Raja-Yoga, and form 
its textbook. The other philosophers, though occasionally differing from 
Patanjali in some philosophical points, have, as a rule, acceded to his 
method of practice a decided consent. The first part of this book comprises 
several lectures to classes delivered by the present writer in New York. The 
second part is a rather free translation of the aphorisms (Sutras) of Patanjali, 
with a running commentary. Effort has been made to avoid technicalities as 
far as possible, and to keep to the free and easy style of conversation. In the 
first part some simple and specific directions are given for the student who 
want to practise, but all such are especially and earnestly reminded  that, with 
few exceptions, Yoga can only be safely learnt by direct contact with a 
teacher. If these conversations succeed in awakening a desire for further 
information on the subject, the teacher will not be wanting.

The system of Patanjali is based upon the system of the Sankhyas, the points 
of difference being very few. The two most important differences are, first, 
that Patanjali admits a Personal God in the form of a first teacher, while the 
only God the Sankhyas admit is a nearly perfected being, temporarily in 
charge of a cycle of creation. Second, the Yogis hold the mind to be equally 
all - pervading with the soul, or Purusha, and the Sankhyas do not.

—The Author.

7

Raja Yoga

8

Raja Yoga

Each soul is potentially divine.

The goal is to manifest this Divinity within by controlling nature, external 
and internal.

Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy -- by 
one, or more, or all of these -- and be free.

This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or rituals, or books, or 
temples, or forms, are but secondary details.

9

Raja Yoga

Introductory

All our knowledge is based upon experience. What we call inferential 
knowledge, in which we go from the less to the more general, or from the 
general to the particular, has experience as its basis. In what are called the 
exact sciences, people easily find the truth, because it appeals to the 
particular experiences of every human being. The scientist does not tell you 
to believe in anything, but he has certain results which come from his own 
experiences, and reasoning on them when he asks us to believe in his 
conclusions, he appeals to some universal experience of humanity. In every 
exact science there is a basis which is common to all humanity, so that we 
can at once see the truth or the fallacy of the conclusions drawn therefrom. 
Now, the question is: Has religion any such basis or not? I shall have to 
answer the question both in the affirmative and in the negative.

Religion, as it is generally taught all over the world, is said to be based upon 
faith and belief, and, in most cases, consists only of different sets of theories, 
and that is the reason why we find all religions quarrelling with one another. 
These theories, again, are based upon belief. One man says there is a great 
Being sitting above the clouds and governing the whole universe, and he 
asks me to believe that solely on the authority of his assertion. In the same 
way, I may have my own ideas, which I am asking others to believe, and if 
they ask a reason, I cannot give them any. This is why religion and 
metaphysical philosophy have a bad name nowadays. Every educated man 
seems to say, "Oh, these religions are only bundles of theories without any 
standard to judge them by, each man preaching his own pet ideas." 
Nevertheless, there is a basis of universal belief in religion, governing all the 
different theories and all the varying ideas of different sects in different 
countries. Going to their basis we find that they also are based upon 
universal experiences.

In the first place, if you analyse all the various religions of the world, you 
will find that these are divided into two classes, those with a book and those 

10

Raja Yoga

without a book. Those with a book are the strongest, and have the largest 
number of followers. Those without books have mostly died out, and the few 
new ones have very small followings. Yet, in all of them we find one 
consensus of opinion, that the truths they teach are the results of the 
experiences of particular persons. The Christian asks you to believe in his 
religion, to believe in Christ and to believe  in him as the incarnation of God, 
to believe in a God, in a soul, and in a better state of that soul. If I ask him 
for reason, he says he believes in them. But if you go to the fountain - head 
of Christianity, you will find that it is based upon experience. Christ said he 
saw God; the disciples said they felt God; and so forth. Similarly, in 
Buddhism, it is Buddha's experience. He experienced certain truths, saw 
them, came in contact with them, and preached them to the world. So with 
the Hindus. In their books the writers, who are called Rishis, or sages, 
declare they experienced certain truths, and these they preach. Thus it is 
clear that all the religions of the world have been built upon that one 
universal and adamantine foundation of all our knowledge -- direct 
experience. The teachers all saw God; they all saw their own souls, they saw 
their future, they saw their eternity, and what they saw they preached. Only 
there is this difference that by most of these religions especially in modern 
times, a peculiar claim is made, namely, that these experiences are 
impossible at the present day; they were only possible with a few men, who 
were the first founders of the religions that subsequently bore their names. 
At the present time these experiences have become obsolete, and, therefore, 
we have now to take religion on belief. This I entirely deny. If there has been 
one experience in this world in any particular branch of knowledge, it 
absolutely follows that that experience has been possible millions of times 
before, and will be repeated eternally. Uniformity is the rigorous law of 
nature; what once happened can happen always.

The teachers of the science of Yoga, therefore, declare that religion is not 
only based upon the experience of ancient times, but that no man can be 
religious until he has the same perceptions himself. Yoga is the science 
which teaches us how to get these perceptions. It is not much use to talk 
about religion until one has felt it. Why is there so much disturbance, so 
much fighting and quarrelling in the name of God? There has been more 
bloodshed in the name of God than for any other cause, because people 

11

Raja Yoga

never went to the fountain - head; they were content only to give a mental 
assent to the customs of their forefathers, and wanted others to do the same. 
What right has a man to say he has a soul if he does not feel it, or that there 
is a God if he does not see Him? If there is a God we must see Him, if there 
is a soul we must perceive it; otherwise it is better not to believe. It is better 
to be an outspoken atheist than a hypocrite. The modern idea, on the one 
hand, with the "learned" is that religion and metaphysics and all search after 
a Supreme Being are futile; on the other hand, with the semi - educated, the 
idea seems to be that these things really have no basis; their only value 
consists in the fact that they furnish strong motive powers for doing good to 
the world. If men believe in a God, they may become good, and moral, and 
so make good citizens. We cannot blame them for holding such ideas, seeing 
that all the teaching these men get is simply to believe in an eternal 
rigmarole of words, without any substance behind them. They are asked to 
live upon words; can they do it? If they could, I should not have the least 
regard for human nature. Man wants truth, wants to experience truth for 
himself; when he has grasped it, realised it, felt it within his heart of hearts, 
then alone, declare the Vedas, would all doubts vanish, all darkness be 
scattered, and all crookedness be made straight. "Ye children of immortality, 
even those who live in the highest sphere, the way is found; there is a way 
out of all this darkness, and that is by perceiving Him who is beyond all 
darkness; there is no other way."

The science of Raja-Yoga proposes to put before humanity a practical and 
scientifically worked out method of reaching this truth. In the first place, 
every science must have its own method of investigation. If you want to 
become an astronomer and sit down and cry "Astronomy! Astronomy!" it 
will never come to you. The same with chemistry. A certain method must be 
followed. You must go to a laboratory, take different substances, mix them 
up, compound them, experiment with them, and out of that will come a 
knowledge of chemistry. If you want to be an astronomer, you must go to an 
observatory, take a telescope, study the stars and planets, and then you will 
become an astronomer. Each science must have its own methods. I could 
preach you thousands of sermons, but they would not make you religious, 
until you practised the method. These are the truths of the sages of all 
countries, of all ages, of men pure and unselfish, who had no motive but to 

12

Raja Yoga

do good to the world. They all declare that they have found some truth 
higher than what the senses can bring to us, and they invite verification. 
They ask us to take up the method and practise honestly, and then, if we do 
not find this higher truth, we will have the right to say there is no truth in the 
claim, but before we have done that, we are not rational in denying the truth 
of their assertions. So we must work faithfully, using the prescribed 
methods, and light will come.

In acquiring knowledge we make use of generalisations, and generalisation 
is based upon observation. We first observe facts, then generalise, and then 
draw conclusions or principles. The knowledge of the mind, of the internal 
nature of man, of thought, can never be had until we have first the power of 
observing the facts that are gong on within. It is comparatively easy to 
observe facts in the external world, for many instruments have been invented 
for the purpose, but in the internal world we have no instrument to help us. 
Yet we know we must observe in order to have a real science. Without a 
proper analysis, any science will be hopeless -- mere theorising. And that is 
why all the psychologists have been quarrelling among themselves since the 
beginning of time, except those few who found out the means of 
observation.

The science of Raja-Yoga, in the first place, proposes to give us such a 
means of observing the internal states. The instrument is the mind itself. The 
power of attention, when properly guided, and directed towards the internal 
world, will analyse the mind, and illumine facts for us. The powers of the 
mind are like rays of light dissipated; when they are concentrated, they 
illumine. This is our only means of knowledge. Everyone is using it, both in 
the external and the internal world; but, for the psychologist, the same 
minute observation has to be directed to the internal world, which the 
scientific man directs to the external; and this requires a great deal of 
practice. From our childhood upwards we have been taught only to pay 
attention to things external, but never to things internal; hence most of us 
have nearly lost the faculty of observing the internal mechanism. To turn the 
mind, as it were, inside, stop it from going outside, and then to concentrate 
all its powers, and throw them upon the mind itself, in order that it may 
know its own nature, analyse itself, is very hard work. Yet that is the only 
way to anything which will be a scientific approach to the subject.

13

Raja Yoga

What is the use of such knowledge? In the first place, knowledge itself is the 
highest reward of knowledge, and secondly, there is also utility in it. It will 
take away all our misery. When by analysing his own mind, man comes face 
to face, as it were, with something which is never destroyed, something 
which is, by its own nature, eternally pure and perfect, he will no more be 
miserable, no more unhappy. All misery comes from fear, from unsatisfied 
desire. Man will find that he never dies, and then he will have no more fear 
of death. When he knows that he is perfect, he will have no more vain 
desires, and both these causes being absent, there will be no more misery -- 
there will be perfect bliss, even while in this body.

There is only one method by which to attain this knowledge, that which is 
called concentration. The chemist in his laboratory concentrates all the 
energies of his mind into one focus, and throws them upon the materials he 
is analysing, and so finds out their secrets. The astronomer concentrates all 
the energies of his mind and projects them through his telescope upon the 
skies; and the stars, the sun, and the moon, give up their secrets to him. The 
more I can concentrate my thoughts on the matter on which I am talking to 
you, the more light I can throw upon you. You are listening to me, and the 
more you concentrate your thoughts, the more clearly you will grasp what I 
have to say.

How has all the knowledge in the world been gained but by the 
concentration of the powers of the mind? The world is ready to give up its 
secrets if we only know how to knock, how to give it the necessary blow. 
The strength and force of the blow come through concentration. There is no 
limit to the power of the human mind. The more concentrated it is, the more 
power is brought to bear on one point; that is the secret.

It is easy to concentrate the mind on external things, the mind naturally goes 
outwards; but not so in the case of religion, or psychology, or metaphysics, 
where the subject and the object, are one. The object is internal, the mind 
itself is the object, and it is necessary to study the mind itself -- mind 
studying mind. We know that there is the power of the mind called 
reflection. I am talking to you. At the same time I am standing aside, as it 
were, a second person, and knowing and hearing what I am talking. You 
work and think at the same time, while a portion of your mind stands by and 

14

Raja Yoga

sees what you are thinking. The powers of the mind should be concentrated 
and turned back upon itself, and as the darkest places reveal their secrets 
before the penetrating rays of the sun, so will this concentrated mind 
penetrate its own innermost secrets. Thus will we come to the basis of belief, 
the real genuine religion. We will perceive for ourselves whether we have 
souls, whether life is of five minutes or of eternity, whether there is a God in 
the universe or none. It will all be revealed to us. This is what Raja-Yoga 
proposes to teach. The goal of all its teaching is how to concentrate the 
minds, then, how to discover the innermost recesses of our own minds, then, 
how to generalise their contents and form our own conclusions from them. 
It, therefore, never asks the question what our religion is, whether we are 
Deists or Atheists, whether Christians, Jews, or Buddhists. We are human 
beings; that is sufficient. Every human being has the right and the power to 
seek for religion. Every human being has the right to ask the reason, why, 
and to have his question answered by himself, if he only takes the trouble.

So far, then, we see that in the study of this Raja-Yoga no faith or belief is 
necessary. Believe nothing until you find it out for yourself; that is what it 
teaches us. Truth requires no prop to make it stand. Do you mean to say that 
the facts of our awakened state require any dreams or imaginings to prove 
them? Certainly not. This study of Raja-Yoga takes a long time and constant 
practice. A part of this practice is physical, but in the main it is mental. As 
we proceed we shall find how intimately the mind is connected with the 
body. If we believe that the mind is simply a finer part of the body, and that 
mind acts upon the body, then it stands to reason that the body must react 
upon the mind. If the body is sick, the mind becomes sick also. If the body is 
healthy, the mind remains healthy and strong. When one is angry, the mind 
becomes disturbed. Similarly when the mind is disturbed, the body also 
becomes disturbed. With the majority of mankind the mind is greatly under 
the control of the body, their mind being very little developed. The vast 
mass of humanity is very little removed from the animals. Not only so, but 
in many instances, the power of control in them is little higher than that of 
the lower animals. We have very little command of our minds. Therefore to 
bring that command about, to get that control over body and mind, we must 
take certain physical helps. When the body is sufficiently controlled, we can 
attempt the manipulation of the mind. By manipulating the mind, we shall be 

15

Raja Yoga

able to bring it under our control, make it work as we like, and compel it to 
concentrate its powers as we desire.

According to the Raja-Yogi, the external world is but the gross form of the 
internal, or subtle. The finer is always the cause, the grosser the effect. So 
the external world is the effect, the internal the cause. In the same way 
external forces are simply the grosser parts, of which the internal forces are 
the finer. The man who has discovered and learned how to manipulate the 
internal forces will get the whole of nature under his control. The Yogi 
proposes to himself no less a task than to master the whole universe, to 
control the whole of nature. He wants to arrive at the point where what we 
call "nature's laws" will have no influence over him, where he will be able to 
get beyond them all. He will be master of the whole of nature, internal and 
external. The progress and civilisation of the human race simply mean 
controlling this nature.

Different races take to different processes of controlling nature. Just as in the 
same society some individuals want to control the external nature, and others 
the internal, so, among races, some want to control the external nature, and 
others the internal. Some say that by controlling internal nature we control 
everything. Others that by controlling external nature we control everything. 
Carried to the extreme both are right, because in nature there is no such 
division as internal or external. These are fictitious limitations that never 
existed. The externalists and the internalists are destined to meet at the same 
point, when both reach the extreme of their knowledge. Just as a physicist, 
when he pushes his knowledge to its limits, finds it melting away into 
metaphysics, so a metaphysician will find that what he calls mind and matter 
are but apparent distinctions, the reality being One.

The end and aim of all science is to find the unity, the One out of which the 
manifold is being manufactured, that One existing as many. Raja - yoga 
proposes to start from the internal world, to study internal nature, and 
through that, control the whole -- both internal and external. It is a very old 
attempt. India has been its special stronghold, but it was also attempted by 
other nations. In Western countries it was regarded as mysticism and people 
who wanted to practise it were either burned or killed as witches and 
sorcerers. In India, for various reasons, it fell into the hands of persons who 

16

Raja Yoga

destroyed ninety per cent of the knowledge, and tried to make a great secret 
of the remainder. In modern times many so - called teachers have arisen in 
the West worse than those of India, because the latter knew something, 
while these modern exponents know nothing.

Anything that is secret and mysterious in these systems of Yoga should be at 
once rejected. The best guide in life is strength. In religion, as in all other 
matters, discard everything that weakens you, have nothing to do with it. 
Mystery - mongering weakens the human brain. It has well - nigh destroyed 
Yoga -- one of the grandest of sciences. From the time it was discovered, 
more than four thousand years ago, Yoga was perfectly delineated, 
formulated, and preached in India. It is a striking fact that the more modern 
the commentator the greater the mistakes he makes, while the more ancient 
the writer the more rational he is. Most of the modern writers talk of all sorts 
of mystery. Thus Yoga fell into the hands of a few persons who made it a 
secret, instead of letting the full blaze of daylight and reason fall upon it. 
They did so that they might have the powers to themselves.

In the first place, there is no mystery in what I teach. What little I know I 
will tell you. So far as I can reason it out I will do so, but as to what I do not 
know I will simply tell you what the books say. It is wrong to believe 
blindly. You must exercise your own reason and judgment; you must 
practise, and see whether these things happen or not. Just as you would take 
up any other science, exactly in the same manner you should take up this 
science for study. There is neither mystery nor danger in it. So far as it is 
true, it ought to be preached in the public streets, in broad daylight. Any 
attempt to mystify these things is productive of great danger.

Before proceeding further, I will tell you a little of the Sankhya philosophy, 
upon which the whole of Raja-Yoga is based. According to the Sankhya 
philosophy, the genesis of perception is as follows: the affections of external 
objects are carried by the outer instruments to their respective brain centres 
or organs, the organs carry the affections to the mind, the mind to the 
determinative faculty, from this the Purusha (the soul) receives them, when 
perception results. Next he gives the order back, as it were, to the motor 
centres to do the needful. With the exception of the Purusha all of these are 
material, but the mind is much finer matter than the external instruments. 

17

Raja Yoga

That material of which the mind is composed goes also to form the subtle 
matter called the Tanmatras. These become gross and make the external 
matter. That is the psychology of the Sankhya. So that between the intellect 
and the grosser matter outside there is only a difference in degree. The 
Purusha is the only thing which is immaterial. The mind is an instrument, as 
it were, in the hands of the soul, through which the soul catches external 
objects. The mind is constantly changing and vacillating, and can, when 
perfected, either attach itself to several organs, to one, or to none. For 
instance, if I hear the clock with great attention, I will not, perhaps, see 
anything although my eyes may be open, showing that the mind was not 
attached to the seeing organ, while it was to the hearing organ. But the 
perfected mind can be attached to all the organs simultaneously. It has the 
reflexive power of looking back into its own depths. This reflexive power is 
what the Yogi wants to attain; by concentrating the powers of the mind, and 
turning them inward, he seeks to know what is happening inside. There is in 
this no question of mere belief; it is the analysis arrived at by certain 
philosophers. Modern physiologists tell us that the eyes are not the organ of 
vision, but that the organ is in one of the nerve centres of the brain, and so 
with all the senses; they also tell us that these centres are formed of the same 
material as the brain itself. The Sankhyas also tell us the same thing. The 
former is a statement on the physical side, and the latter on the psychological 
side; yet both are the same. Our field of research lies beyond this.

The Yogi proposed to attain that fine state of perception in which he can 
perceive all the different mental states. There must be mental perception of 
all of them. One can perceive how the sensation is travelling, how the mind 
is receiving it, how it is going to the determinative faculty, and how this 
gives it to the Purusha. As each science requires certain preparations and has 
its own method, which must be followed before it could be understood, even 
so in Raja-Yoga.

Certain regulations as to food are necessary; we must use that food which 
brings us the purest mind. If you go into a menagerie, you will find this 
demonstrated at once. You see the elephants, huge animals, but calm and 
gentle; and if you go towards the cages of the lions and tigers, you find them 
restless, showing how much difference has been made by food. All the 
forces that are working in this body have been produced out of food; we see 

18

Raja Yoga

that every day. If you begin to fast, first your body will get weak, the 
physical forces will suffer; then, after a few days, the mental forces will 
suffer also. First, memory will fail. Then comes a point, when you are not 
able to think, much less to pursue any course of reasoning. We have, 
therefore, to take care what sort of food we eat at the beginning, and when 
we have got strength enough, when our practice is well advanced, we need 
not be so careful in this respect. While the plant is growing it must be 
hedged round, lest it be injured; but when it becomes a tree, the hedges are 
taken away. It is strong enough to withstand all assaults.

A Yogi must avoid the two extremes of luxury and austerity. He must not 
fast, nor torture his flesh. He who does so, says the Gita, cannot be a Yogi: 
He who fasts, he who keeps awake, he who sleeps much, he who works too 
much, he who does no work, none of these can be a Yogi (Gita, VI, 16).

19

Raja Yoga

The First Steps

Raja-Yoga is divided into eight steps. The first is Yama -- non - killing, 
truthfulness, non - stealing, continence, and non - receiving of any gifts. 
Next is Niyama -- cleanliness, contentment, austerity, study, and self - 
surrender to God. Then comes Asana, or posture; Pranayama, or control of 
Prana; Pratyahara, or restraint of the senses from their objects; Dharana, or 
fixing the mind on a spot; Dhyana, or meditation; and Samadhi, or 
superconsciousness. The Yama and Niyama, as we see, are moral trainings; 
without these as the basis no practice of Yoga will succeed. As these two 
become established, the Yogi will begin to realise the fruits of his practice; 
without these it will never bear fruit. A Yogi must not think of injuring 
anyone, by thought, word, or deed. Mercy shall not be for men alone, but 
shall go beyond, and embrace the whole world.

The next step is Asana, posture. A series of exercises, physical and mental, 
is to be gone through every day, until certain higher states are reached. 
Therefore it is quite necessary that we should find a posture in which we can 
remain long. That posture which is the easiest for one should be the one 
chosen. For thinking, a certain posture may be very easy for one man, while 
to another it may be very difficult. We will find later on that during the study 
of these psychological matters a good deal of activity goes on in the body. 
Nerve currents will have to be displaced and given a new channel. New sorts 
of vibrations will begin, the whole constitution will be remodelled, as it 
were. But the main part of the activity will lie along the spinal column, so 
that the one thing necessary for the posture is to hold the spinal column free, 
sitting erect, holding the three parts -- the chest, neck, and head -- in a 
straight line. Let the whole weight of the body be supported by the ribs, and 
then you have an easy natural posture, with the spine straight. You will 
easily see that you cannot think very high thoughts with the chest in. This 
portion of the Yoga is a little similar to the Hatha - yoga which deals entirely 
with the physical body, its aim being to make the physical body very strong. 
We have nothing to do with it here, because its practices are very difficult, 

20

Raja Yoga

and cannot be learned in a day, and, after all, do not lead to much spiritual 
growth. Many of these practices you will find in Delsarte and other teachers, 
such as placing the body in different postures, but the object in these is 
physical, not psychological. There is not one muscle in the body over which 
a man cannot establish a perfect control. The heart can be made to stop or go 
on at his bidding, and each part of the organism can be similarly controlled.

The result of this branch of Yoga is to make men live long; health is the 
chief idea, the one goal of the Hatha-Yogi. He is determined not to fall sick, 
and he never does. He lives long; a hundred years is nothing to him; he is 
quite young and fresh when he is 150, without one hair turned grey. But that 
is all. A banyan tree lives sometimes 5000 years, but it is a banyan tree and 
nothing more. So, if a man lives long, he is only a healthy animal. One or 
two ordinary lessons of the Hatha-Yogis are very useful. For instance, some 
of you will find it a good thing for headaches to drink cold water through the 
nose as soon as you get up in the morning; the whole day your brain will be 
nice and cool, and you will never catch cold. It is very easy to do; put your 
nose into the water, draw it up through the nostrils and make a pump action 
in the throat.

After one has learned to have a firm erect seat, one has
to perform, according to certain schools, a practice called the purifying of 
the nerves. This part has been rejected by some as not belonging to Raja - 
Yoga, but as so great an authority as the commentator Shankaracharya 
advises it, I think fit that it should be mentioned, and I will quote his own 
directions from his commentary on the Shvethashvatara Upanishad: "The 
mind whose dross has been cleared away by Pranayama, becomes fixed in 
Brahman; therefore Pranayama is declared. First the nerves are to be 
purified, then comes the power to practise Pranayama. Stopping the right 
nostril with the thumb, through the left nostril fill in air, according to 
capacity; then, without any interval, throw the air out through the right 
nostril, closing the left one. Again inhaling through the right nostril eject 
through the left, according to capacity; practising this three or five times at 
four hours of the day, before dawn, during midday, in the evening, and at 
midnight, in fifteen days or a month purity of the nerves is attained; then 
begins Pranayama."

21

Raja Yoga

Practice is absolutely necessary. You may sit down and listen to me by the 
hour every day, but if you do not practise, you will not get one step further. 
It all depends on practice. We never understand these things until we 
experience them. We will have to see and feel them for ourselves. Simply 
listening to explanations and theories will not do. There are several 
obstructions to practice. The first obstruction is an unhealthy body: if the 
body is not in a fit state, the practice will be obstructed. Therefore we have 
to keep the body in good health; we have to take care of what we eat and 
drink, and what we do. Always use a mental effort, what is usually called 
"Christian Science," to keep the body strong. That is all -- nothing further of 
the body. We must not forget that health is only a means to an end. If health 
were the end, we would be like animals; animals rarely become unhealthy.

The second obstruction is doubt; we always feel doubtful about things we do 
not see. Man cannot live upon words, however he may try. So, doubt comes 
to us as to whether there is any truth in these things or not; even the best of 
us will doubt sometimes. With practice, within a few days, a little glimpse 
will come, enough to give one encouragement and hope. As a certain 
commentator on Yoga philosophy says, "When one proof is obtained, 
however little that may be, it will give us faith in the whole teaching of 
Yoga." For instance, after the first few months of practice, you will begin to 
find you can read another's thoughts; they will come to you in picture form. 
Perhaps you will hear something happening at a long distance, when you 
concentrate your mind with a wish to hear. These glimpses will come, by 
little bits at first, but enough to give you faith, and strength, and hope. For 
instance, if you concentrate your thoughts on the tip of your nose, in a few 
days you will begin to smell most beautiful fragrance, which will be enough 
to show you that there are certain mental perceptions that can be made 
obvious without the contact of physical objects. But we must always 
remember that these are only the means; the aim, the end, the goal, of all this 
training is liberation of the soul. Absolute control of nature, and nothing 
short of it, must be the goal. We must be the masters, and not the slaves of 
nature; neither body nor mind must be our master, nor must we forget that 
the body is mine, and not I the body's.

A god and a demon went to learn about the Self from a great sage. They 
studied with him for a long time. At last the sage told them, "You yourselves 

22

Raja Yoga

are the Being you are seeking." Both of them thought that their bodies were 
the Self. They went back to their people quite satisfied and said, "We have 
learned everything that was to be learned; eat, drink,and be merry; we are 
the Self; there is nothing beyond us." The nature of the demon was ignorant, 
clouded; so he never inquired any further, but was perfectly contented with 
the idea that he was God, that by the Self was meant the body. The god had a 
purer nature. He at first committed the mistake of thinking: I, this body, am 
Brahman: so keep it strong and in health, and well dressed, and give it all 
sorts of enjoyments. But, in a few days, he found out that that could not be 
the meaning of the sage, their master; there must be something higher. So he 
came back and said, "Sir, did you teach me that this body was the Self? If so, 
I see all bodies die; the Self cannot die." The sage said, "Find it out; thou art 
That." Then the god thought that the vital forces which work the body were 
what the sage meant. But, after a time, he found that if he ate, these vital 
forces remained strong, but, if he starved, they became weak. The god then 
went back to the sage and said, "Sir, do you mean that the vital forces are the 
Self?" The sage said, "Find out for yourself; thou art That." The god 
returned home once more, thinking that it was the mind, perhaps, that was 
the Self. But in a short while he saw that thoughts were so various, now 
good, again bad; the mind was too changeable to be the Self. He went back 
to the sage and said, "Sir, I do not think that the mind is the Self; did you 
mean that?" "No," replied the sage, "thou art That; find out for yourself." 
The god went home, and at last found that he was the Self, beyond all 
thought, one without birth or death, whom the sword cannot pierce or the 
fire burn, whom the air cannot dry or the water melt, the beginningless and 
endless, the immovable, the intangible, the omniscient, the omnipotent 
Being; that It was neither the body nor the mind, but beyond them all. So he 
was satisfied; but the poor demon did not get the truth, owing to his 
fondness for the body.

This world has a good many of these demonic natures, but there are some 
gods too. If one proposes to teach any science to increase the power of sense 
- enjoyment, one finds multitudes ready for it. If one undertakes to show the 
supreme goal, one finds few to listen to him. Very few have the power to 
grasp the higher, fewer still the patience to attain to it. But there are a few 
also who know that even if the body can be made to live for a thousand 

23

Raja Yoga

years, the result in the end will be the same. When the forces that hold it 
together go away, the body must fall. No man was ever born who could stop 
his body one moment from changing. Body is the name of a series of 
changes. "As in a river the masses of water are changing before you every 
moment, and new masses are coming, yet taking similar form, so is it with 
this body." Yet the body must be kept strong and healthy. It is the best 
instrument we have.

This human body is the greatest body in the universe, and a human being the 
greatest being. Man is higher than all animals, than all angels; none is 
greater than man. Even the Devas (gods) will have to come down again and 
attain to salvation through a human body. Man alone attains to perfection, 
not even the Devas. According to the Jews and Mohammedans, God created 
man after creating the angels and everything else, and after creating man He 
asked the angels to come and salute him, and all did so except Iblis; so God 
cursed him and he became Satan. Behind this allegory is the great truth that 
this human birth is the greatest birth we can have. The lower creation, the 
animal, is dull, and manufactured mostly out of Tamas. Animals cannot have 
any high thoughts; nor can the angels, or Devas, attain to direct freedom 
without human birth. In human society, in the same way, too much wealth or 
too much poverty is a great impediment to the higher development of the 
soul. It is from the middle classes that the great ones of the world come. 
Here the forces are very equally adjusted and balanced.

Returning to our subject, we come next to Pranayama, controlling the 
breathing. What has that to do with concentrating the powers of the mind? 
Breath is like the fly - wheel of this machine, the body. In a big engine you 
find the fly - wheel first moving, and that motion is conveyed to finer and 
finer machinery until the most delicate and finest mechanism in the machine 
is in motion. The breath is that fly - wheel, supplying and regulating the 
motive power to everything in this body.

There was once a minister to a great king. He fell into disgrace. The king, as 
a punishment, ordered him to be shut up in the top of a very high tower. This 
was done, and the minister was left there to perish. He had a faithful wife, 
however, who came to the tower at night and called to her husband at the top 
to know what she could do to help him. He told her to return to the tower the 

24

Raja Yoga

following night and bring with her a long rope, some stout twine, pack 
thread, silken thread, a beetle, and a little honey. Wondering much, the good 
wife obeyed her husband, and brought him the desired articles. The husband 
directed her to attach the silken thread firmly to the beetle, then to smear its 
horns with a drop of honey, and to set it free on the wall of the tower, with 
its head pointing upwards. She obeyed all these instructions, and the beetle 
started on its long journey. Smelling the honey ahead it slowly crept 
onwards, in the hope of reaching the honey, until at last it reached to top of 
the tower, when the minister grasped the beetle, and got possession of the 
silken thread. He told his wife to tie the other end to the pack thread, and 
after he had drawn up the pack thread, he repeated the process with the stout 
twine, and lastly with the rope. Then the rest was easy. The minister 
descended from the tower by means of the rope, and made his escape. In this 
body of ours the breath motion is the "silken thread"; by laying hold of and 
learning to control it we grasp the pack thread of the nerve currents, and 
from these the stout twine of our thoughts, and lastly the rope of Prana, 
controlling which we reach freedom.

We do not know anything about our own bodies; we cannot know. At best 
we can take a dead body, and cut it in pieces, and there are some who can 
take a live animal and cut it in pieces in order to see what is inside the body. 
Still, that has nothing to do with our own bodies. We know very little about 
them. Why do we not? Because our attention is not discriminating enough to 
catch the very fine movements that are going on within. We can know of 
them only when the mind becomes more subtle and enters, as it were, deeper 
into the body. To get the subtle perception we have to begin with the grosser 
perceptions. We have to get hold of that which is setting the whole engine in 
motion. That is the Prana, the most obvious manifestation of which is the 
breath. Then, along with the breath, we shall slowly enter the body, which 
will enable us to find out about the subtle forces, the nerve currents that are 
moving all over the body. As soon as we perceive and learn to feel them, we 
shall begin to get control over them, and over the body. The mind is also set 
in motion by these different nerve currents, so at last we shall reach the state 
of perfect control over the body and the mind, making both our servants. 
Knowledge is power. We have to get this power. So we must begin at the 
beginning, with Pranayama, restraining the Prana. This Pranayama is a long 

25

Raja Yoga

subject, and will take several lessons to illustrate it thoroughly. We shall 
take it part by part.

We shall gradually see the reasons for each exercise and what forces in the 
body are set in motion. All these things will come to us, but it requires 
constant practice, and the proof will come by practice. No amount of 
reasoning which I can give you will be proof to you, until you have 
demonstrated it for yourselves. As soon as you begin to feel these currents in 
motion all over you, doubts will vanish, but it requires hard practice every 
day. You must practise at least twice every day, and the best times are 
towards the morning and the evening. When night passes into day, and day 
into night, a state of relative calmness ensues. The early morning and the 
early evening are the two periods of calmness. Your body will have a like 
tendency to become calm at those times. We should take advantage of that 
natural condition and begin then to practise. Make it a rule not to eat until 
you have practised; if you do this, the sheer force of hunger will break your 
laziness. In India they teach children never to eat until they have practised or 
worshipped, and it becomes natural to them after a time; a boy will not feel 
hungry until he has bathed and practised.

Those of you who can afford it will do better to have a room for this practice 
alone. Do not sleep in that room, it must be kept holy. You must not enter 
the room until you have bathed, and are perfectly clean in body and mind. 
Place flowers in that room always; they are the best surroundings for a Yogi; 
also pictures that are pleasing. Burn incense morning and evening. Have no 
quarrelling, nor anger, nor unholy thought in that room. Only allow those 
persons to enter it who are of the same thought as you. Then gradually there 
will be an atmosphere of holiness in the room, so that when you are 
miserable, sorrowful, doubtful, or your mind is disturbed, the very fact of 
entering that room will make you calm. This was the idea of the temple and 
the church, and in some temples and churches you will find it even now, but 
in the majority of them the very idea has been lost. The idea is that by 
keeping holy vibrations there the place becomes and remains illumined. 
Those who cannot afford to have a room set apart can practise anywhere 
they like. Sit in a straight posture, and the first thing to do is to send a 
current of holy thought to all creation. Mentally repeat, "Let all beings be 
happy; let all beings be peaceful; let all beings be blissful." So do to the east, 

26

Raja Yoga

south, north and west. The more you do that the better you will feel yourself. 
You will find at last that the easiest way to make ourselves healthy is to see 
that others are healthy, and the easiest way to make ourselves happy is to see 
that others are happy. After doing that, those who believe in God should 
pray -- not for money, not for health, nor for heaven; pray for knowledge 
and light; every other prayer is selfish. Then the next thing to do is to think 
of your own body, and see that it is strong and healthy; it is the best 
instrument you have. Think of it as being as strong as adamant, and that with 
the help of this body you will cross the ocean of life. Freedom is never to be 
reached by the weak. Throw away all weakness. Tell your body that it is 
strong, tell your mind that it is strong, and have unbounded faith and hope in 
yourself.

27

Raja Yoga

Prana

Pranayama is not, as many think, something about breath; breath indeed has 
very little to do with it, if anything. Breathing is only one of the many 
exercises through which we get to the real Pranayama. Pranayama means the 
control of Prana. According to the philosophers of India, the whole universe 
is composed of two materials, one of which they call Akasha. It is the 
omnipresent, all - penetrating existence. Everything that has form, 
everything that is the result of combination, is evolved out of this Akasha. It 
is the Akasha that becomes the air, that becomes the liquids, that becomes 
the solids; it is the Akasha that becomes the sun, the earth, the moon, the 
stars, the comets; it is the Akasha that becomes the human body, the animal 
body, the plants, every form that we see, everything that can be sensed, 
everything that exists. It cannot be perceived; it is so subtle that it is beyond 
all ordinary perception; it can only be seen when it has become gross, has 
taken form. At the beginning of creation there is only this Akasha. At the 
end of the cycle the solids, the liquids, and the gases all melt into the Akasha 
again, and the next creation similarly proceeds out of this Akasha.

By what power is this Akasha manufactured into this universe? By the 
power of Prana. Just as Akasha is the infinite, omnipresent material of this 
universe, so is this Prana the infinite, omnipresent manifesting power of this 
universe. At the beginning and at the end of a cycle everything becomes 
Akasha, and all the forces that are in the universe resolve back into the 
Prana; in the next cycle, out of this Prana is evolved everything that we call 
energy, everything that we call force. It is the Prana that is manifesting as 
motion; it is the Prana that is manifesting as gravitation, as magnetism. It is 
the Prana that is manifesting as the actions of the body, as the nerve currents, 
as thought force. From thought down to the lowest force, everything is but 
the manifestation of Prana. The sum total of all forces in the universe, 
mental or physical, when resolved back to their original state, is called 
Prana. "When there was neither aught nor naught, when darkness was 
covering darkness, what existed them? That Akasha existed without 

28

Raja Yoga

motion." The physical motion of the Prana was stopped, but it existed all the 
same.

At the end of a cycle the energies now displayed in the universe quiet down 
and become potential. At the beginning of the next cycle they start up, strike 
upon the Akasha, and out of the Akasha evolve these various forms, and as 
the Akasha changes, this Prana changes also into all these manifestations of 
energy. The knowledge and control of this Prana is really what is meant by 
Pranayama.

This opens to us the door to almost unlimited power. Suppose, for instance, 
a man understood the Prana perfectly, and could control it, what power on 
earth would not be his? He would be able to move the sun and stars out of 
their places, to control everything in the universe, from the atoms to the 
biggest suns, because he would control the Prana. This is the end and aim of 
Pranayama. When the Yogi becomes perfect, there will be nothing in nature 
not under his control. If he orders the gods or the souls of the departed to 
come, they will come at his bidding. All the forces of nature will obey him 
as slaves. When the ignorant see these powers of the Yogi, they call them 
the miracles. One peculiarity of the Hindu mind is that it always inquires for 
the last possible generalisation, leaving the details to be worked out 
afterwards. The question is raised in the Vedas, "What is that, knowing 
which, we shall know everything?" Thus, all books, and all philosophies that 
have been written, have been only to prove that by knowing which 
everything is known. If a man wants to know this universe bit by bit he must 
know every individual grain of sand, which means infinite time; he cannot 
know all of them. Then how can knowledge be? How is it possible for a man 
to be all - knowing through particulars? The Yogis say that behind this 
particular manifestation there is a generalisation. Behind all particular ideas 
stands a generalised, an abstract principle; grasp it, and you have grasped 
everything. Just as this whole universe has been generalised in the Vedas 
into that One Absolute Existence, and he who has grasped that Existence has 
grasped the whole universe, so all forces have been generalised into this 
Prana, and he who has grasped the Prana has grasped all the forces of the 
universe, mental or physical. He who has controlled the Prana has controlled 
his own mind, and all the minds that exist. He who has controlled the Prana 

29

Raja Yoga

has controlled his body, and all the bodies that exist, because the Prana is the 
generalised manifestation of force.

How to control the Prana is the one idea of Pranayama. All the trainings and 
exercises in this regard are for that one end. Each man must begin where he 
stands, must learn how to control the things that are nearest to him. This 
body is very near to us, nearer than anything in the external universe, and 
this mind is the nearest of all. The Prana which is working this mind and 
body is the nearest to us of all the Prana in this universe. This little wave of 
the Prana which represents our own energies, mental and physical, is the 
nearest to us of all the waves of the infinite ocean of Prana. If we can 
succeed in controlling that little wave, then alone we can hope to control the 
whole of Prana. The Yogi who has done this gains perfection; no longer is 
he under any power. He becomes almost almighty, almost all - knowing. We 
see sects in every country who have attempted this control of Prana. In this 
country there are Mind - healers, Faith - healers,

Spiritualists, Christian Scientists, Hypnotists, etc., and if we examine these 
different bodies, we shall find at the back of each this control of the Prana, 
whether they know it or not. If you boil all their theories down, the residuum 
will be that. It is the one and the same force they are manipulating, only 
unknowingly. They have stumbled on the discovery of a force and are using 
it unconsciously without knowing its nature, but it is the  same as the Yogi 
uses, and which comes from Prana.

The Prana is the vital force in every being. Thought is the finest and highest 
action of Prana. Thought, again, as we see, is not all. There is also what we 
call instinct or unconscious thought, the lowest plane of action. If a mosquito 
stings us, our hand will strike it automatically, instinctively. This is one 
expression of thought. All reflex actions of the body belong to this plane of 
thought. There is again the other plane of thought, the conscious. I reason, I 
judge, I think, I see the pros and cons of certain things, yet that is not all. We 
know that reason is limited. Reason can go only to a certain extent, beyond 
that it cannot reach. The circle within which it runs is very very limited 
indeed. Yet at the same time, we find facts rush into this circle. Like the 
coming of comets certain things come into this circle; it is certain they come 
from outside the limit, although our reason cannot go beyond. The causes of 

30

Raja Yoga

the phenomena intruding themselves in this small limit are outside of this 
limit. The mind can exist on a still higher plane, the superconscious. When 
the mind has attained to that state, which is called Samadhi -- perfect 
concentration, superconsciousness -- it goes beyond the limits of reason, and 
comes face to face with facts which no instinct or reason can ever know. All 
manipulations of the subtle forces of the body, the different manifestations 
of Prana, if trained, give a push to the mind, help it to go up higher, and 
become superconscious, from where it acts.

In this universe there is one continuous substance on
every plane of existence. Physically this universe is one: there is no 
difference between the sun and you. The scientist will tell you it is only a 
fiction to say the contrary. There is no real difference between the table and 
me; the table is one point in the mass of matter, and I another point. Each 
form represents, as it were, one whirlpool in the infinite ocean of matter, of 
which not one is constant. Just as in a rushing stream there may be millions 
of whirlpools, the water in each of which is different every moment, turning 
round and round for a few seconds, and then passing out, replaced by a fresh 
quantity, so the whole universe is one constantly changing mass of matter, in 
which all forms of existence are so many whirlpools. A mass of matter 
enters into one whirlpool, say a human body, stays there for a period, 
becomes changed, and goes out into another, say an animal body this time, 
from which again after a few years, it enters into another whirlpool, called a 
lump of mineral. It is a constant change. Not one body is constant. There is 
no such thing as my body, or your body, except in words. Of the one huge 
mass of matter, one point is called a moon, another a sun, another a man, 
another the earth, another a plant, another a mineral. Not one is constant, but 
everything is changing, matter eternally concreting and disintegrating. So it 
is with the mind. Matter is represented by the ether; when the action of Prana 
is most subtle, this very ether, in the finer state of vibration, will represent 
the mind, and there it will be still one unbroken mass. If you can simply get 
to that subtle vibration, you will see and feel that the whole universe is 
composed of subtle vibrations. Sometimes certain drugs have the power to 
take us, while as yet in the senses, to that condition. Many of you may 
remember the celebrated experiment of Sir Humphrey Davy, when the 
laughing gas overpowered him -- how, during the lecture, he remained 

31

Raja Yoga

motionless, stupefied and, after that, he said that the whole universe was 
made up of ideas. For the time being, as it were, the gross vibrations had 
ceased, and only the subtle vibrations which he called ideas, were present to 
him. He could only see the subtle vibrations round him; everything had 
become thought; the whole universe was an ocean of thought, he and 
everyone else had become little thought whirlpools.

Thus, even in the universe of thought we find unity, and at last, when we get 
to the Self, we know that that Self can only be One. Beyond the vibrations of 
matter in its gross and subtle aspects, beyond motion there is but One. Even 
in manifested motion there is only unity. These facts can no more be denied. 
Modern physics also has demonstrated that the sum total of the energies in 
the universe is the same throughout. It has also been proved that this sum 
total of energy exists in two forms. It becomes potential, toned down, and 
calmed, and next it comes out manifested as all these various forces; again it 
goes back to the quiet state, and again it manifests. Thus it goes on evolving 
and involving through eternity. The control of this Prana, as before stated, is 
what is called Pranayama.

The most obvious manifestation of this Prana in the human body is the 
motion of the lungs. If that stops, as a rule all the other manifestations of 
force in the body will immediately stop. But there are persons who can train 
themselves in such a manner that the body will live on, even when this 
motion has stopped. There are some persons who can bury themselves for 
days, and yet live without breathing. To reach the subtle we must take the 
help of the grosser, and so, slowly travel towards the most subtle until we 
gain our point. Pranayama really means controlling this motion of the lungs, 
and this motion is associated with the breath. Not that breath is producing it; 
on the contrary it is producing breath. This motion draws in the air by pump 
action. The Prana is moving the lungs, the movement of the lungs draws in 
the air. So Pranayama is not breathing, but controlling that muscular power 
which moves the lungs. That muscular power which goes out through the 
nerves to the muscles and from them to the lungs, making them move in a 
certain manner, is the Prana, which we have to control in the practice of 
Pranayama. When the Prana has become controlled, then we shall 
immediately find that all the other actions of the Prana in the body will 
slowly come under control. I myself have seen men who have controlled 

32

Raja Yoga

almost every muscle of the body; and why not? If I have control over certain 
muscles, why not over every muscle and nerve of the body? What 
impossibility is there? At present the control is lost, and the motion has 
become automatic. We cannot move our ears at will, but we know that 
animals can. We have not that power because we do not exercise it. This is 
what is called atavism.

Again, we know that motion which has become latent can be brought back 
to manifestation. By hard work and practice certain motions of the body 
which are most dormant can be brought back under perfect control. 
Reasoning thus we find there is no impossibility, but, on the other hand, 
every probability that each part of the body can be brought under perfect 
control. This the Yogi does through Pranayama. Perhaps some of you have 
read that in Pranayama, when drawing in the breath, you must fill your 
whole body with Prana. In the English translations Prana is given as breath, 
and you are inclined to ask how that is to be done. The fault is with the 
translator. Every part of the body can be filled with Prana, this vital force, 
and when you are able to do that, you can control the whole body. All the 
sickness and misery felt in the body will be perfectly controlled; not only so, 
you will be able to control another's body. Everything is infectious in this 
world, good or bad. If your body be in a certain state of tension, it will have 
a tendency to produce the same tension in others. If you are strong and 
healthy, those that live near you will also have the tendency to become 
strong and healthy, but if you are sick and weak, those around you will have 
the tendency to become the same. In the case of one man trying to heal 
another, the first idea is simply transferring his own health to the other. This 
is the primitive sort of healing. Consciously or unconsciously, health can be 
transmitted. A very strong man, living with a weak man, will make him a 
little stronger, whether he knows it or not. When consciously done, it 
becomes quicker and better in its action. Next come those cases in which a 
man may not be very healthy himself, yet we know that he can bring health 
to another. The first man, in such a case, has a little more control over the 
Prana, and can rouse, for the time being, his Prana, as it were, to a certain 
state of vibration, and transmit it to another person.

There have been cases where this process has been carried on at a distance, 
but in reality there is no distance in the sense of a break. Where is the 

33

Raja Yoga

distance that has a break? Is there any break between you and the sun? It is a 
continuous mass of matter, the sun being one part, and you another. Is there 
a break between one part of a river and another? Then why cannot any force 
travel? There is no reason against it. Cases of healing from a distance are 
perfectly true. The Prana can be transmitted to a very great distance; but to 
one genuine case, there are hundreds of frauds. This process of healing is not 
so easy as it is thought to be. In the most ordinary cases of such healing you 
will find that the healers simply take advantage of the naturally healthy state 
of the human body. An allopath comes and treats cholera patients, and gives 
them his medicines. The homoeopath comes and gives his medicines, and 
cures perhaps more than the allopath does, because the homoeopath does not 
disturb his patients, but allows nature to deal with them. The Faith - healer 
cures more still, because he brings the strength of his mind to bear, and 
rouses, through faith, the dormant Prana of the patient.

There is a mistake constantly made by Faith - healers: they think that faith 
directly heals a man. But faith alone does not cover all the ground. There are 
diseases where the worst symptoms are that the patient never thinks that he 
has that disease. That tremendous faith of the patient is itself one symptom 
of the disease, and usually indicates that he will die quickly. In such cases 
the principle that faith cures does not apply. If it were faith alone that cured, 
these patients also would be cured. It is by the Prana that real curing comes. 
The pure man, who has controlled the Prana, has the power of bringing it 
into a certain state of vibration, which can be conveyed to others, arousing in 
them a similar vibration. You see that in everyday actions. I am talking to 
you. What am I trying to do? I am, so to say, bringing my mind to a certain 
state of vibration, and the more I succeed in bringing it to that state, the more 
you will be affected by what I say. All of you know that the day I am more 
enthusiastic, the more you enjoy the lecture; and when I am less enthusiastic, 
you feel lack of interest.

The gigantic will - powers of the world, the world - movers, can bring their 
Prana into a high state of vibration, and it is so great and powerful that it 
catches others in a moment, and thousands are drawn towards them, and half 
the world think as they do. Great prophets of the world had the most 
wonderful control of the Prana, which gave them tremendous will - power; 
they had brought their Prana to the highest state of motion, and this is what 

34

Raja Yoga

gave them power to sway the world. All manifestations of power arise from 
this control. Men may not know the secret, but this is the one explanation. 
Sometimes in your own body the supply of Prana gravitates more or less to 
one part; the balance is disturbed, and when the balance of Prana is 
disturbed, what we call disease is produced.

To take away the superfluous Prana, or to supply the Prana that is wanting, 
will be curing the disease. That again is Pranayama -- to learn when there is 
more or less Prana in one part of the body than there should be. The feelings 
will become so subtle that the mind will feel that there is less Prana in the 
toe or the finger than there should be, and will possess the power to supply 
it. These are among the various functions of Pranayama. They have to be 
learned slowly and gradually, and as you see, the whole scope of Raja - yoga 
is really to teach the control and direction in different planes of the Prana. 
When a man has concentrated his energies, he masters the Prana that is in his 
body. When a man is meditating, he is also concentrating the Prana.

In an ocean there are huge waves, like mountains, then smaller waves, and 
still smaller, down to little bubbles, but back of all these is the infinite ocean. 
The bubble is connected with the infinite ocean at one end, and the huge 
wave at the other end. So, one may be a gigantic man, and another a little 
bubble, but each is connected with that infinite ocean of energy, which is the 
common birthright of every animal that exists. Wherever there is life, the 
storehouse of infinite energy is behind it. Starting as some fungus, some 
very minute, microscopic bubble, and all the time drawing from that infinite 
storehouse of energy, a form is changed slowly and steadily until in course 
of time it becomes a plant, then an animal, then man, ultimately God. This is 
attained through millions of aeons, but what is time? An increase of speed, 
an increase of struggle, is able to bridge the gulf of time. That which 
naturally takes a long time to accomplish can be shortened by the intensity 
of the action, says the Yogi. A man may go on slowly drawing in this energy 
from the infinite mass that exists in the universe, and, perhaps, he will 
require a hundred thousand years to become a Deva, and then, perhaps, five 
hundred thousand years to become still higher, and, perhaps, five millions of 
years to become perfect. Given rapid growth, the time will be lessened. Why 
is it not possible, with sufficient effort, to reach this very perfection in six 
months or six years? There is no limit. Reason shows that. If an engine, with 

35

Raja Yoga

a certain amount of coal, runs two miles an hour, it will run the distance in 
less time with a greater supply of coal. Similarly, why shall not the soul, by 
intensifying its action, attain perfection in this very life? All beings will at 
last attain to that goal, we know. But who cares to wait all these millions of 
aeons? Why not reach it immediately, in this body even, in this human 
form? Why shall I not get that infinite knowledge,  infinite power, now?

The ideal of the Yogi, the whole science of Yoga, is directed to the end of 
teaching men how, by intensifying the power of assimilation, to shorten the 
time for reaching perfection, instead of slowly advancing from point to point 
and waiting until the whole human race has become perfect. All the great 
prophets, saints, and seers of the world -- what did they do? In one span of 
life they lived the whole life of humanity, traversed the whole length of time 
that it takes ordinary humanity to come to perfection. In one life they perfect 
themselves; they have no thought for anything else, never live a moment for 
any other idea, and thus the way is shortened for them. This is what is meant 
by concentration, intensifying the power of assimilation, thus shortening the 
time. Raja-Yoga is the science which teaches us how to gain the power of 
concentration.

What has Pranayama to do with spiritualism? Spiritualism is also a 
manifestation of Pranayama. If it be true that the departed spirits exist, only 
we cannot see them, it is quite probable that there may be hundreds and 
millions of them about us we can neither see, feel, nor touch. We may be 
continually passing and repassing through their bodies, and they do not see 
or feel us. It is a circle within a circle, universe within universe.  We have 
five senses, and we represent Prana in a certain state of vibration. All beings 
in the same state of vibration will see one another, but if there are beings 
who represent Prana in a higher state of vibration, they will not be seen. We 
may increase the intensity of a light until we cannot see it at all, but there 
may be beings with eyes so powerful that they can see such light. Again, if 
its vibrations are very low, we do not see a light, but there are animals that 
may see it, as cats and owls. Our range of vision is only one plane of the 
vibrations of this Prana. Take this atmosphere, for instance; it is piled up 
layer on layer, but the layers nearer to the earth are denser than those  above, 
and as you go higher the atmosphere become finer and finer. Or take the 
case of the ocean; as you go deeper and deeper the pressure of the water 

36

Raja Yoga

increases, and animals which live at the bottom of the sea can never come 
up, or they will be broken into pieces.

Think of the universe as an ocean of ether, consisting of layer after layer of 
varying degrees of vibration under the action of Prana; away from the centre 
the vibrations are less, nearer to it they become quicker and quicker; one 
order of vibration makes one plane. Then suppose these ranges of vibrations 
are cut into planes, so many millions of miles one set of vibration, and then 
so many millions of miles another still higher set of vibration, and so on. It 
is, therefore, probable, that those who live on the plane of a certain state of 
vibration will have the power of recognising one another, but will not 
recognise those above them. Yet, just as by the telescope and the microscope 
we can increase the scope of our vision, similarly we can by Yoga bring 
ourselves to the state of vibration of another plane, and thus enable ourselves 
to see what is going on there. Suppose this room is full of beings whom we 
do not see. They represent Prana in a certain state of vibration while we 
represent another. Suppose they represent a quick one, and we the opposite.

Prana is the material of which they are composed, as well as we. All are 
parts of the same ocean of Prana, they differ only in their rate of vibration. If 
I can bring myself to the quick vibration, this plane will immediately change 
for me: I shall not see you any more; you vanish and they appear. Some of 
you, perhaps, know this to be true. All this bringing of the mind into a higher 
state of vibration is included in one word in Yoga -- samadhi. All these 
states of higher vibration, superconscious vibrations of the mind, are 
grouped in that one word, Samadhi, and the lower states of Samadhi give us 
visions of these beings. The highest grade of Samadhi is when we see the 
real thing, when we see the material out of which the whole of these grades 
of beings are composed, and that one lump of clay being known, we know 
all the clay in the universe.

Thus we see that Pranayama includes all that is true of spiritualism even. 
Similarly, you will find that wherever any sect or body of people is trying to 
search out anything occult and mystical, or hidden, what they are doing is 
really this Yoga, this attempt to control the Prana. You will find that 
wherever there is any extraordinary display of power, it is the manifestation 
of this Prana. Even the physical sciences can be included in Pranayama. 

37

Raja Yoga

What moves the steam engine? Prana, acting through the steam. What are all 
these phenomena of electricity and so forth but Prana? What is physical 
science? The science of Pranayama, by external means. Prana, manifesting 
itself as mental power, can only be controlled by mental means. That part of 
Pranayama which attempts to control the physical manifestations of the 
Prana by physical means is called physical science, and that part which tries 
to control the manifestation of the Prana as mental force by mental means is 
called Raja-Yoga.

38

Raja Yoga

The Psychic Prana

According to the Yogis, there are two nerve currents in the spinal column, 
called Pingala and Ida, and a hollow canal called Sushumna running through 
the spinal cord. At the lower end of the hollow canal is what the Yogis call 
the "Lotus of the Kundalini". They describe it as triangular in form in which, 
in the symbolical language of the Yogis, there is a power called the 
Kundalini, coiled up. When that Kundalini awakes, it tries to force a passage 
through this hollow canal, and as it rises step by step, as it were, layer after 
layer of the mind becomes open and all the different visions and wonderful 
powers come to the Yogi. When it reaches the brain, the Yogi is perfectly 
detached from the body and mind; the soul finds itself free. We know that 
the spinal cord is composed in a peculiar manner. If we take the figure eight 
horizontally, there are two parts which are connected in the middle. Suppose 
you add eight after eight, piled one on top of the other, that will represent the 
spinal cord. The left is the Ida, the right Pingala, and that hollow canal which 
runs through the centre of the spinal cord is the Sushumna. Where the spinal 
cord ends in some of the lumbar vertebrae, a fine fibre issues downwards, 
and the canal runs up even within that fibre, only much finer. The canal is 
closed at the lower end, which is situated near what is called the sacral 
plexus, which, according to modern physiology, is triangular in form. The 
different plexuses that have their centres in the spinal canal can very well 
stand for the different "lotuses" of the Yogi.

The Yogi conceives of several centres, beginning with the Muladhara, the 
basic, and ending with the Sahasrara, the thousand - petalled lotus in the 
brain. So, if we take these different plexuses as representing these lotuses, 
the idea of the Yogi can be understood very easily in the language of modern 
physiology. We know there are two sorts of actions in these nerve currents, 
one afferent, the other efferent; one sensory and the other motor; one 
centripetal, and the other centrifugal. One carries the sensations to the brain, 
and the other from the brain to the outer body. These vibrations are all 
connected with the brain in the long run. Several other facts we have to 

39

Raja Yoga

remember, in order to clear the way for the explanation which is to come. 
This spinal cord, at the brain, ends in a sort of bulb, in the medulla, which is 
not attached to the brain, but floats in a fluid in the brain, so that if there be a 
blow on the head the force of that blow will be dissipated in the fluid, and 
will not hurt the bulb. This is an important fact to remember. Secondly, we 
have also to know that, of all the centres, we have particularly to remember 
three, the Muladhara (the basic), the Sahasrara (the thousand - petalled lotus 
of the brain) and the Manipura (the lotus of the navel).

Next we shall take one fact from physics. We all hear of electricity and 
various other forces connected with it. What electricity is no one knows, but 
so far as it is known, it is a sort of motion. There are various other motions 
in the universe; what is the difference between them and electricity? 
Suppose this table moves -- that the molecules which compose this table are 
moving in different directions; if they are all made to move in the same 
direction, it will be through electricity. Electric motion makes the molecules 
of a body move in the same direction. If all the air molecules in a room are 
made to move in the same direction, it will make a gigantic battery of 
electricity of the room. Another point from physiology we must remember, 
that the centre which regulates the respiratory system, the breathing system, 
has a sort of controlling action over the system of nerve currents.

Now we shall see why breathing is practised. In the first place, from 
rhythmical breathing comes a tendency of all the molecules in the body to 
move in the same direction. When mind changes into will, the nerve currents 
change into a motion similar to electricity, because the nerves have been 
proved to show polarity under the action of electric currents. This shows that 
when the will is transformed into the nerve currents, it is changed into 
something like electricity. When all the motions of the body have become 
perfectly rhythmical, the body has, as it were, become a gigantic battery of 
will. This tremendous will is exactly what the Yogi wants. This is, therefore, 
a physiological explanation of the breathing exercise. It tends to bring a 
rhythmic action in the body, and helps us, through the respiratory centre, to 
control the other centres. The aim of Pranayama here is to rouse the coiled - 
up power in the Muladhara, called the Kundalini.

40

Raja Yoga

Everything that we see, or imagine, or dream, we have to perceive in space. 
This is the ordinary space, called the Mahakasha, or elemental space. When 
a Yogi reads the thoughts of other men, or perceives supersensuous objects, 
he sees them in another sort of space called the Chittakasha, the mental 
space. When perception has become objectless, and the soul shines in its 
own nature, it is called the Chidakasha, or knowledge space. When the 
Kundalini is aroused, and enters the canal of the Sushumna, all the 
perceptions are in the mental space. When it has reached that end of the 
canal which opens out into the brain, the objectless perception is in the 
knowledge space. Taking the analogy of electricity, we find that man can 
send a current only along a wire,[1] but nature requires no wires to send her 
tremendous currents.

This proves that the wire is not really necessary, but that only our inability to 
dispense with it compels us to use it.

Similarly, all the sensations and motions of the body are being sent into the 
brain, and sent out of it, through these wires of nerve fibres. The columns of 
sensory and motor fibres in the spinal cord are the Ida and Pingala of the 
Yogis. They are the main channels through which the afferent and efferent 
currents travel. But why should not the mind send news without any wire, or 
react without any wire? We see this is done in nature. The Yogi says, if you 
can do that, you have got rid of the bondage of matter. How to do it? If you 
can make the current pass through the Sushumna, the canal in the middle of 
the spinal column, you have solved the problem. The mind has made this 
network of the nervous system, and has to break it, so that no wires will be 
required to work through. Then alone will all knowledge come to us -- no 
more bondage of body; that is why it is so important that we should get 
control of that Sushumna. If we can send the mental current through the 
hollow canal without any nerve fibres to act as wires, the Yogi says, the 
problem is solved, and he also says it can be done.

This Sushumna is in ordinary persons closed up at the lower extremity; no 
action comes through it. The Yogi proposes a practice by which it can be 
opened, and the nerve currents made to travel through. When a sensation is 
carried to a centre, the centre reacts. This reaction, in the case of automatic 
centres, is followed by motion; in the case of conscious centres it is followed 

41

Raja Yoga

first by perception, and secondly by motion. All perception is the reaction to 
action from outside. How, then, do perceptions in dreams arise? There is 
then no action from outside. The sensory motions, therefore, are coiled up 
somewhere. For instance, I see a city; the perception of that city is from the 
reaction to the sensations brought from outside objects comprising that city. 
That is to say, a certain motion in the brain molecules has been set up by the 
motion in the incarrying nerves, which again are set in motion by external 
objects in the city. Now, even after a long time I can remember the city. This 
memory is exactly the same phenomenon, only it is in a milder form. But 
whence is the action that sets up even the milder form of similar vibrations 
in the brain? Not certainly from the primary sensations. Therefore it must be 
that the sensations are coiled up somewhere, and they, by their acting, bring 
out the mild reaction which we call dream perception.

Now the centre where all these residual sensations are, as it were, stored up, 
is called the Muladhara, the root receptacle, and the coiled - up energy of 
action is Kundalini, "the coiled up". It is very probable that the residual 
motor energy is also stored up in the same centre, as, after deep study or 
meditation on external objects, the part of the body where the Muladhara 
centre is situated (probably the sacral plexus) gets heated. Now, if this coiled 
- up energy be roused and made active, and then consciously made to travel 
up the Sushumna canal, as it acts upon centre after centre, a tremendous 
reaction will set in. When a minute portion of energy travels along a nerve 
fibre and causes reaction from centres, the perception is either dream or 
imagination. But when by the power of long internal meditation the vast 
mass of energy stored up travels along the Sushumna, and strikes the 
centres, the reaction is tremendous, immensely superior to the reaction of 
dream or imagination, immensely more intense that the reaction of sense - 
perception. It is supersensuous perception. And when it reaches the 
metropolis of all sensations, the brain, the whole brain, as it were, reacts, and 
the result is the full blaze of illumination, the perception of the Self. As this 
Kundalini force travels from centre to centre, layer after layer of the mind, as 
it were, opens up, and this universe is perceived by the

Yogi in its fine, or causal form. Then alone the causes of this universe, both 
as sensation and reaction, are known as they are, and hence comes all 

42

Raja Yoga

knowledge. The causes being known, the knowledge of the effects is sure to 
follow.

Thus the rousing of the Kundalini is the one and only way to attaining 
Divine Wisdom, superconscious perception, realisation of the spirit. The 
rousing may come in various ways, through love for God, through the mercy 
of perfected sages, or through the power of the analytic will of the 
philosopher. Wherever there was any manifestation of what is ordinarily 
called supernatural power or wisdom, there a little current of Kundalini must 
have found its way into the Sushumna. Only, in the vast majority of such 
cases, people had ignorantly stumbled on some practice which set free a 
minute portion of the coiled - up Kundalini. All worship, consciously or 
unconsciously, leads to this end. The man who thinks that he is receiving 
response to his prayers does not know that the fulfillment comes from his 
own nature, that he has succeeded by the mental attitude of prayer in waking 
up a bit of this infinite power which is coiled up within himself. What, thus, 
men ignorantly worship under various names, through fear and tribulation, 
the Yogi declares to the world to be the real power coiled up in every being, 
the mother of eternal happiness, if we but know how to approach her. And 
Raja-Yoga is the science of religion, the rationale of all worship, all prayers, 
forms, ceremonies, and miracles.

References

1. The reader should remember that this was spoken before the discovery 
of wireless telegraphy.--Ed.

43

Raja Yoga

The Control Of The Psychic Prana

We have now to deal with the exercises in Pranayama. We have seen that the 
first step, according to the Yogis, is to control the motion of the lungs. What 
we want to do is to feel the finer motions that are going on in the body. Our 
minds have become externalised, and have lost sight of the fine motions 
inside. If we can begin to feel them, we can begin to control them. These 
nerve currents go on all over the body, bringing life and vitality to every 
muscle, but we do not feel them. The Yogi says we can learn to do so. How? 
By taking up and controlling the motion of the lungs; when we have done 
that for a sufficient length of time, we shall be able to control the finer 
emotions.

We now come to the exercises in Pranayama. Sit upright; the body must be 
kept straight. The spinal cord, although not attached to the vertebral column, 
is yet inside of it. If you sit crookedly you disturb this spinal cord, so let it be 
free. Any time that you sit crookedly and try to meditate you do yourself an 
injury. The three parts of the body, the chest, the neck, and the head, must be 
always held straight in one line. You will find that by a little practice this 
will come to you as easy as breathing. The second thing is to get control of 
the nerves. We have said that the nerve centre that controls the respiratory 
organs has a sort of controlling effect on the other nerves, and rhythmical 
breathing is, therefore, necessary. The breathing that we generally use 
should not be called breathing at all. It is very irregular. Then there are some 
natural differences of breathing between men and women.

The first lesson is just to breathe in a measured way,
in and out. That will harmonise the system. When you have practised this for 
some time, you will do well to join to it the repetition of some word as 
"Om," or any other sacred word. In India we use certain symbolical words 
instead of counting one, two, three, four. That is why I advise you to join the 
mental repetition of the "Om," or some other sacred word to the Pranayama. 
Let the word flow in and out with the breath, rhythmically, harmoniously, 

44

Raja Yoga

and you will find the whole body is becoming rhythmical. Then you will 
learn what rest is. Compared with it, sleep is not rest. Once this rest comes 
the most tired nerves will be calmed down, and you will find that you have 
never before really rested.

The first effect of this practice is perceived in the change of expression of 
one's face; harsh lines disappear; with calm thought calmness comes over 
the face. Next comes beautiful voice. I never saw a Yogi with a croaking 
voice. These signs come after a few months' practice. After practising the 
above mentioned breathing for a few days, you should take up a higher one. 
Slowly fill the lungs with breath through the Ida, the left nostril, and at the 
same time concentrate the mind on the nerve current. You are, as it were, 
sending the nerve current down the spinal column, and striking violently on 
the last plexus, the basic lotus which is triangular in form, the seat of the 
Kundalini. Then hold the current there for some time. Imagine that you are 
slowly drawing that nerve current with the breath through the other side, the 
Pingala, then slowly throw it out through the right nostril. This you will find 
a little difficult to practise. The easiest way is to stop the right nostril with 
the thumb, and then slowly draw in the breath through the left; then close 
both nostrils with thumb and forefinger, and imagine that you are sending 
that current down, and striking the base of the Sushumna; then take the 
thumb off, and let the breath out through the right nostril. Next inhale slowly 
through that nostril, keeping the other closed by the forefinger, then close 
both, as before. The way the Hindus practise this would be very difficult for 
this country, because they do it from their childhood, and their lungs are 
prepared for it. Here it is well to begin with four seconds, and slowly 
increase. Draw in four seconds, hold in sixteen seconds, then throw out in 
eight seconds. This makes one Pranayama. At the same time think of the 
basic lotus, triangular in form; concentrate the mind on that centre. The 
imagination can help you a great deal. The next breathing is slowly drawing 
the breath in, and then immediately throwing it out slowly, and then 
stopping the breath out, using the same numbers. The only difference is that 
in the first case the breath was held in, and in the second, held out. This last 
is the easier one. The breathing in which you hold the breath in the lungs 
must not be practised too much. Do it only four times in the morning, and 
four times in the evening. Then you can slowly increase the time and 

45

Raja Yoga

number. You will find that you have the power to do so, and that you take 
pleasure in it. So very carefully and cautiously increase as you feel that you 
have the power, to six instead of four. It may injure you if you practise it 
irregularly.

Of the three processes for the purification of the nerves, described above, the 
first and the last are neither difficult nor dangerous. The more you practise 
the first one the calmer you will be. Just think of "Om," and you can practise 
even while you are sitting at your work. You will be all the better for it. 
Some day, if you practise hard, the Kundalini will be aroused. For those who 
practise once or twice a day, just a little calmness of the body and mind will 
come, and beautiful voice; only for those who can go on further with it will 
Kundalini be aroused, and the whole of nature will begin to change, and the 
book of knowledge will open. No more will you need to go to books for 
knowledge; your own mind will have become your book, containing infinite 
knowledge. I have already spoken of the Ida and Pingala currents, flowing 
through either side of the spinal column, and also of the Sushumna, the 
passage through the centre of the spinal cord. These three are present in 
every animal; whatever being has a spinal column has these three lines of 
action. But the Yogis claim that in an ordinary man the Sushumna is closed; 
its action is not evident while that of the other two is carrying power to 
different parts of the body.

The Yogi alone has the Sushumna open. When this Sushumna current opens, 
and begins to rise, we get beyond the senses, our minds become 
supersensuous, superconscious -- we get beyond even the intellect, where 
reasoning cannot reach. To open that Sushumna is the prime object of the 
Yogi. According to him, along this Sushumna are ranged these centres, or, in 
more figurative language, these lotuses, as they are called. The lowest one is 
at the lower end of the spinal cord, and is called Muladhara, the next higher 
is called Svadhishthana, the third Manipura, the fourth Anahata, the fifth 
Vishuddha, the sixth Ajna and the last, which is in the brain, is the 
Sahasrara, or "the thousand - petalled". Of these we have to take cognition 
just now of two centres only, the lowest, the Muladhara, and the highest, the 
Sahasrara. All energy has to be taken up from its seat in the Muladhara and 
brought to the Sahasrara. The Yogis claim that of all the energies that are in 
the human body the highest is what they call "Ojas". Now this Ojas is stored 

46

Raja Yoga

up in the brain, and the more Ojas is in a man's head, the more powerful he 
is, the more intellectual, the more spiritually strong. One man may speak 
beautiful language and beautiful thoughts, but they do not impress people; 
another man speaks neither beautiful language nor beautiful thoughts, yet his 
words charm. Every movement of his is powerful. That is the power of Ojas.

Now in every man there is more or less of this Ojas
stored up. All the forces that are working in the body in their highest become 
Ojas. You must remember that it is only a question of transformation. The 
same force which is working outside as electricity or magnetism will 
become changed into inner force; the same forces that are working as 
muscular energy will be changed into Ojas. The Yogis say that that part of 
the human energy which is expressed as sex energy, in sexual thought, when 
checked and controlled, easily becomes changed into Ojas, and as the 
Muladhara guides these, the Yogi pays particular attention to that centre. He 
tries to take up all his sexual energy and convert it into Ojas. It is only the 
chaste man or woman who can make the Ojas rise and store it in the brain; 
that is why chastity has always been considered the highest virtue. A man 
feels that if he is unchaste, spirituality goes away, he loses mental vigour 
and moral stamina. That is why in all the religious orders in the world which 
have produced spiritual giants you will always find absolute chastity insisted 
upon. That is why the monks came into existence, giving up marriage. There 
must be perfect chastity in thought, word, and deed; without it the practice of 
Raja-Yoga is dangerous, and may lead to insanity. If people practise Raja-
Yoga and at the same time lead an impure life, how can they expect to 
become Yogis?

47

Raja Yoga

Pratyahara And Dharana

The next step is called Pratyahara. What is this? You know how perceptions 
come. First of all there are the external instruments, then the internal organs 
acting in the body through the brain centres, and there is the mind. When 
these come together and attach themselves to some external object, then we 
perceive it. At the same time it is a very difficult thing to concentrate the 
mind and attach it to one organ only; the mind is a slave.

We hear "Be good," and "Be good," and "Be good," taught all over the 
world. There is hardly a child, born in any country in the world, who has not 
been told, "Do not steal," "Do not tell a lie," but nobody tells the child how 
he can help doing them. Talking will not help him. Why should he not 
become a thief? We do not teach him how not to steal; we simply tell him, 
"Do not steal." Only when we teach him to control his mind do we really 
help him. All actions, internal and external, occur when the mind joins itself 
to certain centres, called the organs. Willingly or unwillingly it is drawn to 
join itself to the centres, and that is why people do foolish deeds and feel 
miserable, which, if the mind were under control, they would not do. What 
would be the result of controlling the mind? It then would not join itself to 
the centres of perception, and, naturally, feeling and willing would be under 
control. It is clear so far. Is it possible? It is perfectly possible. You see it in 
modern times; the faith - healers teach people to deny misery and pain and 
evil. Their philosophy is rather roundabout, but it is a part of Yoga upon 
which they have somehow stumbled. Where they succeed in making a 
person throw off suffering by denying it, they really use a part of Pratyahara, 
as they make the mind of the person strong enough to ignore the senses. The 
hypnotists in a similar manner, by their suggestion, excite in the patient a 
sort of morbid Pratyahara for the time being. The so - called hypnotic 
suggestion can only act upon a weak mind. And until the operator, by means 
of fixed gaze or otherwise, has succeeded in putting the mind of the subject 
in a sort of passive, morbid condition, his suggestions never work.

48

Raja Yoga

Now the control of the centres which is established in a hypnotic patient or 
the patient of faith - healing, by the operator, for a time, is reprehensible, 
because it leads to ultimate ruin. It is not really controlling the brain centres 
by the power of one's own will, but is, as it were, stunning the patient's mind 
for a time by sudden blows which another's will delivers to it. It is not 
checking by means of reins and muscular strength the mad career of a fiery 
team, but rather by asking another to deliver heavy blows on the heads of the 
horses, to stun them for a time into gentleness. At each one of these 
processes the man operated upon loses a part of his mental energies, till at 
last, the mind, instead of gaining the power of perfect control, becomes a 
shapeless, powerless mass, and the only goal of the patient is the lunatic 
asylum.

Every attempt at control which is not voluntary, not with the controller's 
own mind, is not only disastrous, but it defeats the end. The goal of each 
soul is freedom, mastery -- freedom from the slavery of matter and thought, 
mastery of external and internal nature. Instead of leading towards that, 
every will - current from another, in whatever form it comes, either as direct 
control of organs, or as forcing to control them while under a morbid 
condition, only rivets one link more to the already existing heavy chain of 
bondage of past thoughts, past superstitions. Therefore, beware how you 
allow yourselves to be acted upon by others. Beware how you unknowingly 
bring another to ruin. True, some succeed in doing good to many for a time, 
by giving a new trend to their propensities, but at the same time, they bring 
ruin to millions by the unconscious suggestions they throw around, rousing 
in men and women that morbid, passive, hypnotic condition which makes 
them almost soulless at last. Whosoever, therefore, asks any one to believe 
blindly, or drags people behind him by the controlling power of his superior 
will, does an injury to humanity, though he may not intend it.

Therefore use your own minds, control body and mind yourselves, 
remember that until you are a diseased person, no extraneous will can work 
upon you; avoid everyone, however great and good he may be, who asks you 
to believe blindly. All over the world there have been dancing and jumping 
and howling sects, who spread like infection when they begin to sing and 
dance and preach; they also are a sort of hypnotists. They exercise a singular 
control for the time being over sensitive persons, alas! often, in the long run, 

49

Raja Yoga

to degenerate whole races. Ay, it is healthier for the individual or the race to 
remain wicked than be made apparently good by such morbid extraneous 
control. One's heart sinks to think of the amount of injury done to humanity 
by such irresponsible yet well - meaning religious fanatics. They little know 
that the minds which attain to sudden spiritual upheaval under their 
suggestions, with music and prayers, are simply making themselves passive, 
morbid, and powerless, and opening themselves to any other suggestion, be 
it ever so evil. Little do these ignorant, deluded persons dream that whilst 
they are congratulating themselves upon their miraculous power to transform 
human hearts, which power they think was poured upon them by some 
Being above the clouds, they are sowing the seeds of future decay, of crime, 
of lunacy, and of death. Therefore, beware of everything that take away your 
freedom. Know that it is dangerous, and avoid it by all the means in your 
power.

He who has succeeded in attaching or detaching his
mind to or from the centres at will has succeeded in Pratyahara, which 
means, "gathering towards," checking the outgoing powers of the mind, 
freeing it from the thraldom of the senses. When we can do this, we shall 
really possess character; then alone we shall have taken a long step towards 
freedom; before that we are mere machines.

How hard it is to control the mind! Well has it been compared to the 
maddened monkey. There was a monkey, restless by his own nature, as all 
monkeys are. As if that were not enough some one made him drink freely of 
wine, so that he became still more restless. Then a scorpion stung him. 
When a man is stung by a scorpion, he jumps about for a whole day; so the 
poor monkey found his condition worse than ever. To complete his misery a 
demon entered into him. What language can describe the uncontrollable 
restlessness of that monkey? The human mind is like that monkey, 
incessantly active by its own nature; then it becomes drunk with the wine of 
desire, thus increasing its turbulence. After desire takes possession comes 
the sting of the scorpion of jealousy at the success of others, and last of all 
the demon of pride enters the mind, making it think itself of all importance. 
How hard to control such a mind!

50

Raja Yoga

The first lesson, then, is to sit for some time and let the mind run on. The 
mind is bubbling up all the time. It is like that monkey jumping about. Let 
the monkey jump as much as he can; you simply wait and watch. 
Knowledge is power, says the proverb, and that is true. Until you know what 
the mind is doing you cannot control it. Give it the rein; many hideous 
thoughts may come into it; you will be astonished that it was possible for 
you to think such thoughts. But you will find that each day the mind's 
vagaries are becoming less and less violent, that each day it is becoming 
calmer. In the first few months you will find that the mind will have a great 
many thoughts, later you will find that they have somewhat decreased, and 
in a few more months they will be fewer and fewer, until at last the mind 
will be under perfect control; but we must patiently practise every day. As 
soon as the steam is turned on, the engine must run; as soon as things are 
before us we must perceive; so a man, to prove that he is not a machine, 
must demonstrate that he is under the control of nothing. This controlling of 
the mind, and not allowing it to join itself to the centres, is Pratyahara. How 
is this practised? It is a tremendous work, not to be done in a day. Only after 
a patient, continuous struggle for years can we succeed.

After you have practised Pratyahara for a time, take the next step, the 
Dharana, holding the mind to certain points. What is meant by holding the 
mind to certain points? Forcing the mind to feel certain parts of the body to 
the exclusion of others. For instance, try to feel only the hand, to the 
exclusion of other parts of the body. When the Chitta, or mind - stuff, is 
confined and limited to a certain place it is Dharana. This Dharana is of 
various sorts, and along with it, it is better to have a little play of the 
imagination. For instance, the mind should be made to think of one point in 
the heart. That is very difficult; an easier way is to imagine a lotus there. 
That lotus is full of light, effulgent light. Put the mind there. Or think of the 
lotus in the brain as full of light, or of the different centres in the Sushumna 
mentioned before.

The Yogi must always practise. He should try to live alone; the 
companionship of different sorts of people distracts the mind; he should not 
speak much, because to speak distracts the mind; not work much, because 
too much work distracts the mind; the mind cannot be controlled after a 
whole day's hard work. One observing the above rules becomes a Yogi. 

51

Raja Yoga

Such is the power of Yoga that even the least of it will bring a great amount 
of benefit. It will not hurt anyone, but will benefit everyone.

First of all, it will tone down nervous excitement, bring calmness, enable us 
to see things more clearly. The temperament will be better, and the health 
will be better. Sound health will be one of the first signs, and a beautiful 
voice. Defects in the voice will be changed. This will be among the first of 
the many effects that will come. Those who practise hard will get many 
other signs. Sometimes there will be sounds, as a peal of bells heard at a 
distance, commingling, and falling on the ear as one continuous sound. 
Sometimes things will be seen, little specks of light floating and becoming 
bigger and bigger; and when these things come, know that you are 
progressing fast.

Those who want to be Yogis, and practise hard, must take care of their diet 
at first. But for those who want only a little practice for everyday business 
sort of life, let them not eat too much; otherwise they may eat whatever they 
please. For those who want to make rapid progress, and to practise hard, a 
strict diet is absolutely necessary. They will find it advantageous to live only 
on milk and cereals for some months. As the organisation becomes finer and 
finer, it will be found in the beginning that the least irregularity throws one 
out of balance. One bit of food more or less will disturb the whole system, 
until one gets perfect control, and then one will be able to eat whatever one 
likes.

When one begins to concentrate, the dropping of a pin will seem like a 
thunderbolt going through the brain. As the organs get finer, the perceptions 
get finer. These are the stages through which we have to pass, and all those 
who persevere will succeed. Give up all argumentation and other 
distractions. Is there anything in dry intellectual jargon? It only throws the 
mind off its balance and disturbs it. Things of subtler planes have to be 
realised. Will talking do that? So give up all vain talk. Read only those 
books which have been written by persons who have had realisation.

Be like the pearl oyster. There is a pretty Indian fable to the effect that if it 
rains when the star Svati is in the ascendant, and a drop of rain falls into an 
oyster, that drop becomes a pearl. The oysters know this, so they come to the 

52

Raja Yoga

surface when that star shines, and wait to catch the precious raindrop. When 
a drop falls into them, quickly the oysters close their shells and dive down to 
the bottom of the sea, there to patiently develop the drop into the pearl. We 
should be like that. First hear, then understand, and then, leaving all 
distractions, shut your minds to outside influences, and devote yourselves to 
developing the truth within you. There is the danger of frittering away your 
energies by taking up an idea only for its novelty, and then giving it up for 
another that is newer. Take one thing up and do it, and see the end of it, and 
before you have seen the end, do not give it up. He who can become mad 
with an idea, he alone sees light. Those that only take a nibble here and a 
nibble there will never attain anything. They may titillate their nerves for a 
moment, but there it will end. They will be slaves in the hands of nature, and 
will never get beyond the senses.

Those who really want to be Yogis must give up, once for all, this nibbling 
at things. Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life -- think of it, dream 
of it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your 
body, be full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the 
way to success, and this is the way great spiritual giants are produced. 
Others are mere talking machines. If we really want to be blessed, and make 
others blessed, we must go deeper. The first step is not to disturb the mind, 
not to associate with persons whose ideas are disturbing. All of you know 
that certain persons, certain places, certain foods, repel you. Avoid them; 
and those who want to go to the highest, must avoid all company, good or 
bad. Practise hard; whether you live or die does not matter. You have to 
plunge in and work, without thinking of the result. If you are brave enough, 
in six months you will be a perfect Yogi. But those who take up just a bit of 
it and a little of everything else make no progress. It is of no use simply to 
take a course of lessons. To those who are full of Tamas, ignorant and dull -- 
those whose minds never get fixed on any idea, who only crave for 
something to amuse them -- religion and philosophy are simply objects of 
entertainment. These are the unpersevering. They hear a talk, think it very 
nice, and then go home and forget all about it. To succeed, you must have 
tremendous perseverance, tremendous will. "I will drink the ocean," says the 
persevering soul, "at my will mountains will crumble up." Have that sort of 
energy, that sort of will, work hard, and you will reach the goal.

53

Raja Yoga
Dhyana And Samadhi

We have taken a cursory view of the different steps in Raja-Yoga, except the 
finer ones, the training in concentration, which is the goal, to which  Raja-
Yoga will lead us. We see, as human beings, that all our knowledge which is 
called rational is referred to consciousness. My consciousness of this table, 
and of your presence, makes me know that the table and you are here. At the 
same time, there is a very great part of my existence of which I am not 
conscious. All the different organs inside the body, the different parts of the 
brain -- nobody is conscious of these.

When I eat food, I do it consciously; when I assimilate it, I do it 
unconsciously. When the food is manufactured into blood, it is done 
unconsciously. When out of the blood all the different parts of my body are 
strengthened, it is done unconsciously. And yet it is I who am doing all this; 
there cannot be twenty people in this one body. How do I know that I do it, 
and nobody else? It may be urged that my business is only in eating and 
assimilating the food, and that strengthening the body by the food is done for 
me by somebody else. That cannot be, because it can be demonstrated that 
almost every action of which we are now unconscious can be brought up to 
the plane of consciousness. The heart is beating apparently without our 
control. None of us here can control the heart; it goes on its own way. But by 
practice men can bring even the heart under control, until it will just beat at 
will, slowly, or quickly, or almost stop. Nearly every part of the body can be 
brought under control. What does this show? That the functions which are 
beneath consciousness are also performed by us, only we are doing it 
unconsciously. We have, then, two planes in which the human mind works. 
First is the conscious plane, in which all work is always accompanied with 
the feeling of egoism. Next comes the unconscious plane, where all work is 
unaccompanied by the feeling of egoism. That part of mind - work which is 
unaccompanied with the feeling of egoism is unconscious work, and that 
part which is accompanied with the feeling of egoism is conscious work. In 
the lower animals this unconscious work is called instinct. In higher animals, 

54

Raja Yoga

and in the highest of all animals, man, what is called conscious work 
prevails.

But it does not end here. There is a still higher plane upon which the mind 
can work. It can go beyond consciousness. Just as unconscious work is 
beneath consciousness, so there is another work which is above 
consciousness, and which also is not accompanied with the feeling of 
egoism. The feeling of egoism is only on the middle plane. When the mind 
is above or below that line, there is no feeling of "I", and yet the mind 
works. When the mind goes beyond this line of self - consciousness, it is 
called Samadhi or superconsciousness. How, for instance, do we know that a 
man in Samadhi has not gone below consciousness, has not degenerated 
instead of going higher? In both cases the works are unaccompanied with 
egoism. The answer is, by the effects, by the results of the work, we know 
that which is below, and that which is above. When a man goes into deep 
sleep, he enters a plane beneath consciousness. He works the body all the 
time, he breathes, he moves the body, perhaps, in his sleep, without any 
accompanying feeling of ego; he is unconscious, and when he returns from 
his sleep, he is the same man who went into it. The sum total of the 
knowledge which he had before he went into the sleep remains the same; it 
does not increase at all. No enlightenment comes. But when a man goes into 
Samadhi, if he goes into it a fool, he comes out a sage.

What makes the difference? From one state a man comes out the very same 
man that he went in, and from another state the man comes out enlightened, 
a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life changed, 
illumined. These are the two effects. Now the effects being different, the 
causes must be different. As this illumination with which a man comes back 
from Samadhi is much higher than can be got from unconsciousness, or 
much higher than can be got by reasoning in a conscious state, it must, 
therefore, be superconsciousness, and Samadhi is called the superconscious 
state.

This, in short, is the idea of Samadhi. What is its application? The 
application is here. The field of reason, or of the conscious workings of the 
mind, is narrow and limited. There is a little circle within which human 
reason must move. It cannot go beyond. Every attempt to go beyond is 

55

Raja Yoga

impossible, yet it is beyond this circle of reason that there lies all that 
humanity holds most dear. All these questions, whether there is an immortal 
soul, whether there is a God, whether there is any supreme intelligence 
guiding this universe or not, are beyond the field of reason. Reason can 
never answer these questions. What does reason say? It says, "I am agnostic; 
I do not know either yea or nay." Yet these questions are so important to us. 
Without a proper answer to them, human life will be purposeless. All our 
ethical theories, all our moral attitudes, all that is good and great in human 
nature, have been moulded upon answers that have come from beyond the 
circle. It is very important, therefore, that we should have answers to these 
questions. If life is only a short play, if the universe is only a "fortuitous 
combination of atoms," then why should I do good to another? Why should 
there be mercy, justice, or fellow - feeling? The best thing for this world 
would be to make hay while the sun shines, each man for himself. If there is 
no hope, why should I love my brother, and not cut his throat? If there is 
nothing beyond, if there is no freedom, but only rigorous dead laws, I should 
only try to make myself happy here. You will find people saying nowadays 
that they have utilitarian grounds as the basis of morality. What is this basis? 
Procuring the greatest amount of happiness to the greatest number. Why 
should I do this? Why should I not produce the greatest unhappiness to the 
greatest number, if that serves my purpose? How will utilitarians answer this 
question? How do you know what is right, or what is wrong? I am impelled 
by my desire for happiness, and I fulfil it, and it is in my nature; I know 
nothing beyond. I have these desires, and must fulfil them; why should you 
complain? Whence come all these truths about human life, about morality, 
about the immortal soul, about God, about love and sympathy, about being 
good, and, above all, about being unselfish?

All ethics, all human action and all human thought, hang upon this one idea 
of unselfishness. The whole idea of human life can be put into that one 
word, unselfishness. Why should we be unselfish? Where is the necessity, 
the force, the power, of my being unselfish? You call yourself a rational 
man, a utilitarian; but if you do not show me a reason for utility, I say you 
are irrational. Show me the reason why I should not be selfish. To ask one to 
be unselfish may be good as poetry, but poetry is not reason. Show me a 
reason. Why shall I be unselfish, and why be good? Because Mr. and Mrs. 

56

Raja Yoga

So - and - so say so does not weigh with me. Where is the utility of my 
being unselfish? My utility is to be selfish if utility means the greatest 
amount of happiness. What is the answer? The utilitarian can never give it. 
The answer is that this world is only one drop in an infinite ocean, one link 
in an infinite chain. Where did those that preached unselfishness, and taught 
it to the human race, get this idea? We know it is not instinctive; the 
animals, which have instinct, do not know it. Neither is it reason; reason 
does not know anything about these ideas. Whence then did they come?

We find, in studying history, one fact held in common by all the great 
teachers of religion the world ever had. They all claim to have got their 
truths from beyond, only many of them did not know where they got them 
from. For instance, one would say that an angel came down in the form of a 
human being, with wings, and said to him, "Hear, O man, this is the 
message." Another says that a Deva, a bright being, appeared to him. A third 
says he dreamed that his ancestor came and told him certain things. He did 
not know anything beyond that. But this is common that all claim that this 
knowledge has come to them from beyond, not through their reasoning 
power. What does the science of Yoga teach? It teaches that they were right 
in claiming that all this knowledge came to them from beyond reasoning, but 
that it came from within themselves.

The Yogi teaches that the mind itself has a higher state of existence, beyond 
reason, a superconscious state, and when the mind gets to that higher state, 
then this knowledge, beyond reasoning, comes to man. Metaphysical and 
transcendental knowledge comes to that man. This state of going beyond 
reason, transcending ordinary human nature, may sometimes come by 
chance to a man who does not understand its science; he, as it were, 
stumbles upon it. When he stumbles upon it, he generally interprets it as 
coming from outside. So this explains why an inspiration, or transcendental 
knowledge, may be the same in different countries, but in one country it will 
seem to come through an angel, and in another through a Deva, and in a 
third through God. What does it mean? It means that the mind brought the 
knowledge by its own nature, and that the finding of the knowledge was 
interpreted according to the belief and education of the person through 
whom it came. The real fact is that these various men, as it were, stumbled 
upon this superconscious state.

57

Raja Yoga

The Yogi says there is a great danger in stumbling upon this state. In a good 
many cases there is the danger of the brain being deranged, and, as a rule, 
you will find that all those men, however great they were, who had stumbled 
upon this superconscious state without understanding it, groped in the dark, 
and generally had, along with their knowledge, some quaint superstition. 
They opened themselves to hallucinations. Mohammed claimed that the 
Angel Gabriel came to him in a cave one day and took him on the heavenly 
horse, Harak, and he visited the heavens. But with all that, Mohammed 
spoke some wonderful truths. If you read the Koran, you find the most 
wonderful truths mixed with superstitions. How will you explain it? That 
man was inspired, no doubt, but that inspiration was, as it were, stumbled 
upon. He was not a trained Yogi, and did not know the reason of what he 
was doing. Think of the good Mohammed did to the world, and think of the 
great evil that has been done through his fanaticism! Think of the millions 
massacred through his teachings, mothers bereft of their children, children 
made orphans, whole countries destroyed, millions upon millions of people 
killed!

So we see this danger by studying the lives of great teachers like 
Mohammed and others. Yet we find, at the same time, that they were all 
inspired. Whenever a prophet got into the superconscious state by 
heightening his emotional nature, he brought away from it not only some 
truths, but some fanaticism also, some superstition which injured the world 
as much as the greatness of the teaching helped. To get any reason out of the 
mass incongruity we call human life, we have to transcend our reason, but 
we must do it scientifically, slowly, by regular practice, and we must cast off 
all superstition. We must take up the study of the superconscious state just as 
any other science. On reason we must have to lay our foundation, we must 
follow reason as far as it leads, and when reason fails, reason itself will show 
us the way to the highest plane. When you hear a man say, "I am inspired," 
and then talk irrationally, reject it. Why? Because these three states -- 
instinct, reason, and superconsciousness, or the unconscious, conscious, and 
superconscious states -- belong to one and the same mind. There are not 
three minds in one man, but one state of it develops into the others. Instinct 
develops into reason, and reason into the transcendental consciousness; 
therefore, not one of the states contradicts the others. Real inspiration never 

58

Raja Yoga

contradicts reason, but fulfills it. Just as you find the great prophets saying, 
"I come not to destroy but to fulfil," so inspiration always comes to fulfil 
reason, and is in harmony with it.

All the different steps in Yoga are intended to bring us scientifically to the 
superconscious state, or Samadhi. Furthermore, this is a most vital point to 
understand, that inspiration is as much in every man's nature as it was in that 
of the ancient prophets. These prophets were not unique; they were men as 
you or I. They were great Yogis. They had gained this superconsciousness, 
and you and I can get the same. They were not peculiar people. The very fact 
that one man ever reached that state, proves that it is possible for every man 
to do so. Not only is it possible, but every man must, eventually, get to that 
state, and that is religion. Experience is the only teacher we have. We may 
talk and reason all our lives, but we shall not understand a word of truth, 
until we experience it ourselves. You cannot hope to make a man a surgeon 
by simply giving him a few books. You cannot satisfy my curiosity to see a 
country by showing me a map; I must have actual experience. Maps can 
only create curiosity in us to get more perfect knowledge. Beyond that, they 
have no value whatever. Clinging to books only degenerates the human 
mind. Was there ever a more horrible blasphemy than the statement that all 
the knowledge of God is confined to this or that book? How dare men call 
God infinite, and yet try to compress Him within the covers of a little book! 
Millions of people have been killed because they did not believe what the 
books said, because they would not see all the knowledge of God within the 
covers of a book. Of course this killing and murdering has gone by, but the 
world is still tremendously bound up in a belief in books.

In order to reach the superconscious state in a scientific manner it is 
necessary to pass through the various steps of Raja-Yoga I have been 
teaching. After Pratyahara and Dharana, we come to Dhyana, meditation. 
When the mind has been trained to remain fixed on a certain internal or 
external location, there comes to it the power of flowing in an unbroken 
current, as it were, towards that point. This state is called Dhyana. When one 
has so intensified the power of Dhyana as to be able to reject the external 
part of perception and remain meditating only on the internal part, the 
meaning, that state is called Samadhi. The three -- dharana, Dhyana, and 
Samadhi -- together, are called Samyama. That is, if the mind can first 

59

Raja Yoga

concentrate upon an object, and then is able to continue in that concentration 
for a length of time, and then, by continued concentration, to dwell only on 
the internal part of the perception of which the object was the effect, 
everything comes under the control of such a mind.

This meditative state is the highest state of existence. So long as there is 
desire, no real happiness can come. It is only the contemplative, witness - 
like study of objects that brings to us real enjoyment and happiness. The 
animal has its happiness in the senses, the man in his intellect, and the god in 
spiritual contemplation. It is only to the soul that has attained to this 
contemplative state that the world really becomes beautiful. To him who 
desires nothing, and does not mix himself up with them, the manifold 
changes of nature are one panorama of beauty and sublimity.

These ideas have to be understood in Dhyana, or meditation. We hear a 
sound. First, there is the external vibration; second, the nerve motion that 
carries it to the mind; third, the reaction from the mind, along with which 
flashes the knowledge of the object which was the external cause of these 
different changes from the ethereal vibrations to the mental reactions. These 
three are called in Yoga, Shabda (sound), Artha (meaning), and Jnana 
(knowledge). In the language of physics and physiology they are called the 
ethereal vibration, the motion in the nerve and brain, and the mental 
reaction. Now these, though distinct processes, have become mixed up in 
such a fashion as to become quite indistinct. In fact, we cannot now perceive 
any of these, we only perceive their combined effect, what we call the 
external object. Every act of perception includes these three, and there is no 
reason why we should not be able to distinguish them.

When, by the previous preparations, it becomes strong and controlled, and 
has the power of finer perception, the mind should be employed in 
meditation. This meditation must begin with gross objects and slowly rise to 
finer and finer, until it becomes objectless. The mind should first be 
employed in perceiving the external causes of sensations, then the internal 
motions, and then its own reaction. When it has succeeded in perceiving the 
external causes of sensations by themselves, the mind will acquire the power 
of perceiving all fine material existences, all fine bodies and forms. When it 
can succeed in perceiving the motions inside by themselves, it will gain the 

60

Raja Yoga

control of all mental waves, in itself or in others, even before they have 
translated themselves into physical energy; and when he will be able to 
perceive the mental reaction by itself, the Yogi will acquire the knowledge 
of everything, as every sensible object, and every thought is the result of this 
reaction. Then will he have seen the very foundations of his mind, and it will 
be under his perfect control. Different powers will come to the Yogi, and if 
he yields to the temptations of any one of these, the road to his further 
progress will be barred. Such is the evil of running after enjoyments. But if 
he is strong enough to reject even these miraculous powers, he will attain to 
the goal of Yoga, the complete suppression of the waves in the ocean of the 
mind. Then the glory of the soul, undisturbed by the distractions of the mind, 
or motions of the body, will shine in its full effulgence; and the Yogi will 
find himself as he is and as he always was, the essence of knowledge, the 
immortal, the all - pervading.

Samadhi is the property of every human being -- nay, every animal. From 
the lowest animal to the highest angel, some time or other, each one will 
have to come to that state, and then, and then alone, will real religion begin 
for him. Until then we only struggle towards that stage. There is no 
difference now between us and those who have no religion, because we have 
no experience. What is concentration good for, save to bring us to this 
experience? Each one of the steps to attain Samadhi has been reasoned out, 
properly adjusted, scientifically organised, and, when faithfully practised, 
will surely lead us to the desired end. Then will all sorrows cease, all 
miseries vanish; the seeds for actions will be burnt, and the soul will be free 
for ever.

61

Raja Yoga

Raja-Yoga In Brief

The following is a summary of Raja-Yoga freely translated from the Kurma-
Purana.

The fire of Yoga burns the cage of sin that is around a man. Knowledge 
becomes purified and Nirvana is directly obtained. From Yoga comes 
knowledge; knowledge again helps the Yogi. He who combines in himself 
both Yoga and knowledge, with him the Lord is pleased. Those that practise 
Mahayoga, either once a day, or twice a day, or thrice, or always, know them 
to be gods. Yoga is divided into two parts. One is called Abhava, and the 
other, Mahayoga. Where one's self is meditated upon as zero, and bereft of 
quality, that is called Abhava. That in which one sees the self as full of bliss 
and bereft of all impurities, and one with God, is called Mahayoga. The 
Yogi, by each one, realises his Self. The other Yogas that we read and hear 
of, do not deserve to be ranked with the excellent Mahayoga in which the 
Yogi finds himself and the whole universe as God. This is the highest of all 
Yogas.

Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and 
Samadhi are the steps in Raja-Yoga, of which non - injury, truthfulness, non 
- covetousness, chastity, not receiving anything from another are called 
Yama. This purifies the mind, the Chitta. Never producing pain by thought, 
word, and deed, in any living being, is what is called Ahimsa, non - injury. 
There is no virtue higher than non - injury. There is no happiness higher than 
what a man obtains by this attitude of non - offensiveness, to all creation. By 
truth we attain fruits of work. Through truth everything is attained. In truth 
everything is established. Relating facts as they are -- this is truth. Not 
taking others' goods by stealth or by force, is called Asteya, non - 
covetousness. Chastity in thought, word, and deed, always, and in all 
conditions, is what is called Brahmacharya. Not receiving any present from 
anybody, even when one is suffering terribly, is what is called Aparigraha. 
The idea is, when a man receives a gift from another, his heart becomes 

62

Raja Yoga

impure, he becomes low, he loses his independence, he becomes bound and 
attached.

The following are helps to success in Yoga and are called Niyama or regular 
habits and observances; Tapas, austerity; Svadhyaya, study; Santosha, 
contentment; Shaucha, purity; Ishvara - pranidhana, worshipping God. 
Fasting, or in other ways controlling the body, is called physical Tapas. 
Repeating the Vedas and other Mantras, by which the Sattva material in the 
body is purified, is called study, Svadhyaya. There are three sorts of 
repetitions of these Mantras. One is called the verbal, another semi - verbal, 
and the third mental. The verbal or audible is the lowest, and the inaudible is 
the highest of all. The repetition which is loud is the verbal; the next one is 
where only the lips move, but no sound is heard. The inaudible repetition of 
the Mantra, accompanied with the thinking of its meaning, is called the 
"mental repetition," and is the highest. The sages have said that there are two 
sorts of purification, external and internal. The purification of the body by 
water, earth, or other materials is the external purification, as bathing etc. 
Purification of the mind by truth, and by all the other virtues, is what is 
called internal purification. Both are necessary. It is not sufficient that a man 
should be internally pure and externally dirty. When both are not attainable 
the internal purity is the better, but no one will be a Yogi until he has both. 
Worship of God is by praise, by thought, by devotion.

We have spoken about Yama and Niyama. The next is Asana (posture). The 
only thing to understand about it is leaving the body free, holding the chest, 
shoulders, and head straight. Then comes Pranayama. Prana means the vital 
forces in one's own body, Ayama means controlling them. There are three 
sorts of Pranayama, the very simple, the middle, and the very high. 
Pranayama is divided into three parts: filling, restraining, and emptying. 
When you begin with twelve seconds it is the lowest Pranayama; when you 
begin with twenty - four seconds it is the middle Pranayama; that Pranayama 
is the best which begins with thirty - six seconds. In the lowest kind of 
Pranayama there is perspiration, in the medium kind, quivering of the body, 
and in the highest Pranayama levitation of the body and influx of great bliss. 
There is a Mantra called the Gayatri. It is a very holy verse of the Vedas. 
"We meditate on the glory of that Being who has produced this universe; 
may He enlighten our minds." Om is joined to it at the beginning and the 

63

Raja Yoga

end. In one Pranayama repeat three Gayatris. In all books they speak of 
Pranayama being divided into Rechaka (rejecting or exhaling), Puraka 
(inhaling), and Kumbhaka (restraining, stationary). The Indriyas, the organs 
of the senses, are acting outwards and coming in contact with external 
objects. Bringing them under the control of the will is what is called 
Pratyahara or gathering towards oneself. Fixing the mind on the lotus of the 
heart, or on the centre of the head, is what is called Dharana. Limited to one 
spot, making that spot the base, a particular kind of mental waves rises; 
these are not swallowed up by other kinds of waves, but by degrees become 
prominent, while all the others recede and finally disappear. Next the 
multiplicity of these waves gives place to unity and one wave only is left in 
the mind. This is Dhyana, meditation. When no basis is necessary, when the 
whole of the mind has become one wave, one - formedness, it is called 
Samadhi. Bereft of all help from places and centres, only the meaning of the 
thought is present. If the mind can be fixed on the centre for twelve seconds 
it will be a Dharana, twelve such Dharanas will be a Dhyana, and twelve 
such Dhyanas will be a Samadhi.

Where there is fire, or in water or on ground which is strewn with dry leaves, 
where there are many ant - hills, where there are wild animals, or danger, 
where four streets meet, where there is too much noise, where there are 
many wicked persons, Yoga must not be practised. This applies more 
particularly to India. Do not practise when the body feels very lazy or ill, or 
when the mind is very miserable and sorrowful. Go to a place which is well 
hidden, and where people do not come to disturb you. Do not choose dirty 
places. Rather choose beautiful scenery, or a room in your own house which 
is beautiful. When you practise, first salute all the ancient Yogis, and your 
own Guru, and God, and then begin.

Dhyana is spoken of, and a few examples are given of what to meditate 
upon. Sit straight, and look at the tip of your nose. Later on we shall come to 
know how that concentrates the mind, how by controlling the two optic 
nerves one advances a long way towards the control of the arc of reaction, 
and so to the control of the will. Here are a few specimens of meditation. 
Imagine a lotus upon the top of the head, several inches up, with virtue as its 
centre, and knowledge as its stalk. The eight petals of the lotus are the eight 
powers of the Yogi. Inside, the stamens and pistils are renunciation. If the 

64

Raja Yoga

Yogi refuses the external powers he will come to salvation. So the eight 
petals of the lotus are the eight powers, but the internal stamens and pistils 
are extreme renunciation, the renunciation of all these powers. Inside of that 
lotus think of the Golden One, the Almighty, the Intangible, He whose name 
is Om, the Inexpressible, surrounded with effulgent light. Meditate on that. 
Another meditation is given. Think of a space in your heart, and in the midst 
of that space think that a flame is burning. Think of that flame as your own 
soul and inside the flame is another effulgent light, and that is the Soul of 
your soul, God. Meditate upon that in the heart. Chastity, non - injury, 
forgiving even the greatest enemy, truth, faith in the Lord, these are all 
different Vrittis. Be not afraid if you are not perfect in all of these; work, 
they will come. He who has given up all attachment, all fear, and all anger, 
he whose whole soul has gone unto the Lord, he who has taken refuge in the 
Lord, whose heart has become purified, with whatsoever desire he comes to 
the Lord, He will grant that to him. Therefore worship Him through 
knowledge, love, or renunciation. "He who hates none, who is the friend of 
all, who is merciful to all, who has nothing of his own, who is free from 
egoism, who is even - minded in pain and pleasure, who is forbearing, who 
is always satisfied, who works always in Yoga, whose self has become 
controlled, whose will is firm, whose mind and intellect are given up unto 
Me, such a one is My beloved Bhakta. From whom comes no disturbance, 
who cannot be disturbed by others, who is free from joy, anger, fear, and 
anxiety, such a one is My beloved. He who does not depend on anything, 
who is pure and active, who does not care whether good comes or evil, and 
never becomes miserable, who has given up all efforts for himself; who is 
the same in praise or in blame, with a silent, thoughtful mind, blessed with 
what little comes in his way, homeless, for the whole world is his home, and 
who is steady in his ideas, such a one is My beloved Bhakta." Such alone 
become Yogis.

There was a great god - sage called Narada. Just as there are sages among 
mankind, great Yogis, so there are great Yogis among the gods. Narada was 
a good Yogi, and very great. He travelled everywhere. One day he was 
passing through a forest, and saw a man who had been meditating until the 
white ants had built a huge mound round his body -- so long had he been 
sitting in that position. He said to Narada, "Where are you going?" Narada 

65

Raja Yoga

replied, "I am going to heaven." "Then ask God when He will be merciful to 
me; when I shall attain freedom." Further on Narada saw another man. He 
was jumping about, singing, dancing, and said, "Oh, Narada, where are you 
going?" His voice and his gestures were wild. Narada said, "I am going to 
heaven." "Then, ask when I shall be free." Narada went on. In the course of 
time he came again by the same road, and there was the man who had been 
meditating with the ant - hill round him. He said, "Oh, Narada, did you ask 
the Lord about me?" "Oh, yes." "What did He say?" "The Lord told me that 
you would attain freedom in four more births." Then the man began to weep 
and wail, and said, "I have meditated until an ant - hill has grown around me, 
and I have four more births yet!" Narada went to the other man. "Did you 
ask my question?" "Oh, yes. Do you see this tamarind tree? I have to tell you 
that as many leaves as there are on that tree, so many times, you shall be 
born, and then you shall attain freedom." The man began to dance for joy, 
and said, "I shall have freedom after such a short time!" A voice came, "My 
child, you will have freedom this minute." That was the reward for his 
perseverance. He was ready to work through all those births, nothing 
discouraged him. But the first man felt that even four more births were too 
long. Only perseverance, like that of the man who was willing to wait aeons 
brings about the highest result.

66

Raja Yoga

Patanjali's Yoga Aphorisms
Introduction

Before going into the Yoga aphorisms I shall try to discuss one great 
question, upon which rests the whole theory of religion for the Yogis. It 
seems the consensus of opinion of the great minds of the world, and it has 
been nearly demonstrated by researches into physical nature, that we are the 
outcome and manifestation of an absolute condition, back of our present 
relative condition, and are going forward, to return to that absolute. This 
being granted, the question is: Which is better, the absolute or this state? 
There are not wanting people who think that this manifested state is the 
highest state of man. Thinkers of great calibre are of the opinion that we are 
manifestations of undifferentiated being and the differentiated state is higher 
than the absolute. They imagine that in the absolute there cannot be any 
quality; that it must be insensate, dull, and lifeless; that only this life can be 
enjoyed, and, therefore, we must cling to it. First of all we want to inquire 
into other solutions of life. There was an old solution that man after death 
remained the same; that all his good sides, minus his evil sides, remained for 
ever. Logically stated, this means that man's goal is the world; this world 
carried a stage higher, and eliminated of its evils, is the state they call 
heaven. This theory, on the face of it, is absurd and puerile, because it 
cannot be. There cannot be good without evil, nor evil without good. To live 
in a world where it is all good and no evil is what Sanskrit logicians call a 
"dream in the air". Another theory in modern times has been presented by 
several schools, that man's destiny is to go on always improving, always 
struggling towards, but never reaching the goal. This statement, though 
apparently very nice, is also absurd, because there is no such thing as motion 
in a straight line. Every motion is in a circle. If you can take up a stone, and 
project it into space, and then live long enough, that stone, if it meets with 
no obstruction, will come back exactly to your hand. A straight line, 
infinitely projected, must end in a circle. Therefore, this idea that the destiny 
of man is progressing ever forward and forward, and never stopping, is 
absurd. Although extraneous to the subject, I may remark that this idea 

67

Raja Yoga

explains the ethical theory that you must not hate, and must love. Because, 
just as in the case of electricity the modern theory is that the power leaves 
the dynamo and completes the circle back to the dynamo, so with hate and 
love; they must come back to the source. Therefore do not hate anybody, 
because that hatred which comes out from you, must, in the long run, come 
back to you. If you love, that love will come back to you, completing the 
circle. It is as certain as can be, that every bit of hatred that goes out of the 
heart of a man comes back to him in full force, nothing can stop it; similarly 
every impulse of love comes back to him.

On other and practical grounds we see that the theory of eternal progression 
is untenable, for destruction is the goal of everything earthly. All our 
struggles and hopes and fears and joys, what will they lead to? We shall all 
end in death. Nothing is so certain as this. Where, then, is this motion in a 
straight line -- this infinite progression? It is only going out to a distance, 
and coming back to the centre from which it started. See how, from nebulae, 
the sun, moon, and stars are produced; then they dissolve and go back to 
nebulae. The same is being done everywhere. The plant takes material from 
the earth, dissolves, and gives it back. Every form in this world is taken out 
of surrounding atoms and goes back to these atoms. It cannot be that the 
same law acts differently in different places. Law is uniform. Nothing is 
more certain than that. If this is the law of nature, it also applies to thought. 
Thought will dissolve and go back to its origin. Whether we will it or not, 
we shall have to return to our origin which is called God or Absolute. We all 
came from God, and we are all bound to go back to God. Call that by any 
name you like, God, Absolute, or Nature, the fact remains the same. "From 
whom all this universe comes out, in whom all that is born lives, and to 
whom all returns." This is one fact that is certain. Nature works on the same 
plan; what is being worked out in one sphere is repeated in millions of 
spheres. What you see with the planets, the same will it be with this earth, 
with men, and with all. The huge wave is a mighty compound of small 
waves, it may be of millions; the life of the whole world is a compound of 
millions of little lives, and the death of the whole world is the compound of 
the deaths of these millions of little beings.

Now the question arises: Is going back to God the higher state, or not? The 
philosophers of the Yoga school emphatically answer that it is. They say that 

68

Raja Yoga

man's present state is a degeneration. There is not one religion on the face of 
the earth which says that man is an improvement. The idea is that his 
beginning is perfect and pure, that he degenerates until he cannot degenerate 
further, and that there must come a time when he shoots upward again to 
complete the circle. The circle must be described. However low he may go, 
he must ultimately take the upward bend and go back to the original source, 
which is God. Man comes from God in the beginning, in the middle he 
becomes man, and in the end he goes back to God. This is the method of 
putting it in the dualistic form. The monistic form is that man is God, and 
goes back to Him again. If our present state is the higher one, then why is 
there so much horror and misery, and why is there an end to it? If this is the 
higher state, why does it end?

That which corrupts and degenerates cannot be the highest state. Why 
should it be so diabolical, so unsatisfying? It is only excusable, inasmuch as 
through it we are taking a higher groove; we have to pass through it in order 
to become regenerate again. Put a seed into the ground and it disintegrates, 
dissolves after a time, and out of that dissolution comes the splendid tree. 
Every soul must disintegrate to become God. So it follows that the sooner 
we get out of this state we call "man" the better for us. Is it by committing 
suicide that we get out of this state? Not at all. That will be making it worse. 
Torturing ourselves, or condemning the world, is not the way to get out. We 
have to pass through the Slough of Despond, and the sooner we are through, 
the better. It must always be remembered that man - state is not the highest 
state.

The really difficult part to understand is that this state, the Absolute, which 
has been called the highest, is not, as some fear, that of the zoophyte or of 
the stone. According to them, there are only two states of existence, one of 
the stone, and the other of thought. What right have they to limit existence to 
these two? Is there not something infinitely superior to thought? The 
vibrations of light, when they are very low, we do not see; when they 
become a little more intense, they become light to us; when they become 
still more intense, we do not see them -- it is dark to us. Is the darkness in 
the end the same darkness as in the beginning? Certainly not; they are 
different as the two poles. Is the thoughtlessness of the stone the same as the 
thoughtlessness of God? Certainly not. God does not think; He does not 

69

Raja Yoga

reason. Why should He? Is anything unknown to Him, that He should 
reason? The stone cannot reason; God does not. Such is the difference. 
These philosophers think it is awful if we go beyond thought; they find 
nothing beyond thought.

There are much higher states of existence beyond reasoning. It is really 
beyond the intellect that the first state of religious life is to be found. When 
you step beyond thought and intellect and all reasoning,  then you have made 
the first step towards God; and that is the beginning of life. What is 
commonly called life is but an embryo state.

The next question will be: What proof is there that the state beyond thought 
and reasoning is the highest state? In the first place, all the great men of the 
world, much greater than those that only talk, men who moved the world, 
men who never thought of any selfish ends whatever, have declared that this 
life is but a little stage on the way towards Infinity which is beyond. In the 
second place, they not only say so, but show the way to every one, explain 
their methods, that all can follow in their steps. In the third place, there is no 
other way left. There is no other explanation. Taking for granted that there is 
no higher state, why are we going through this circle all the time; what 
reason can explain the world? The sensible world will be the limit to our 
knowledge if we cannot go farther, if we must not ask for anything more. 
This is what is called agnosticism. But what reason is there to believe in the 
testimony of the senses? I would call that man a true agnostic who would 
stand still in the street and die. If reason is all in all, it leaves us no place to 
stand on this side of nihilism. If a man is agnostic of everything but money, 
fame, and name, he is only a fraud. Kant has proved beyond all doubt that 
we cannot penetrate beyond the tremendous dead wall called reason. But 
that is the very first idea upon which all Indian thought takes its stand, and 
dares to seek, and succeeds in finding something higher than reason, where 
alone the explanation of the present state is to be found. This is the value of 
the study of something that will take us beyond the world. "Thou art our 
father, and wilt take us to the other shore of this ocean of ignorance." That is 
the science of religion, nothing else.

70

Raja Yoga

Concentration: Its Spiritual Uses

1. Now concentration is explained.(Sanskrit) 

2. Yoga is restraining the mind - stuff (Chitta) from taking various 
forms (Vrittis).

A good deal of explanation is necessary here. We have to understand what 
Chitta is, and what the Vrittis are. I have eyes. Eyes do not see. Take away 
the brain centre which is in the head, the eyes will still be there, the retinae 
complete, as also the pictures of objects on them and yet the eyes will not 
see. So the eyes are only a secondary instrument, not the organ of vision. 
The organ of vision is in a nerve centre of the brain. The two eyes will not 
be sufficient. Sometimes a man is asleep with his eyes open. The light is 
there and the picture is there, but a third thing is necessary -- the mind must 
be joined to the organ. The eye is the external instrument; we need also the 
brain centre and the agency of the mind. Carriages roll down a street, and 
you do not hear them. Why? Because your mind has not attached itself to the 
organ of hearing. First, there is the instrument, then there is the organ, and 
third, the mind attached to these two. The mind takes the impression farther 
in, and presents it to the determinative faculty -- buddhi -- which reacts. 
Along with this reaction flashes the idea of egoism. Then this mixture of 
action and reaction is presented to the

Purusha, the real Soul, who perceives an object in this mixture. The organs 
(Indriyas), together with the mind (Manas), the determinative faculty 
(Buddhi), and egoism (Ahamkara), form the group called the Antahkarana 
(the internal instrument). They are but various processes in the mind - stuff, 
called Chitta. The waves of thought in the Chitta are called Vrittis (literally 
"whirlpool"). What is thought? Thought is a force, as is gravitation or 
repulsion. From the infinite storehouse of force in nature, the instrument 
called Chitta takes hold of some, absorbs it and sends it out as thought. 
Force is supplied to us through food, and out of that food the body obtains 
the power of motion etc. Others, the finer forces, it throws out in what we 
call thought. So we see that the mind is not intelligent; yet it appears to be 
intelligent. Why? Because the intelligent soul is behind it. You are the only 

71

Raja Yoga

sentient being; mind is only the instrument through which you catch the 
external world. Take this book; as a book it does not exist outside, what 
exists outside is unknown and unknowable. The unknowable furnishes the 
suggestion that gives a blow to the mind, and the mind gives out the reaction 
in the form of a book, in the same manner as when a stone is thrown into the 
water, the water is thrown against it in the form of waves. The real universe 
is the occasion of the reaction of the mind. A book form, or an elephant 
form, or a man form, is not outside; all that we know is our mental reaction 
from the outer suggestion. "Matter is the permanent possibility of 
sensations," said John Stuart Mill. It is only the suggestion that is outside. 
Take an oyster for example. You know how pearls are made. A parasite gets 
inside the shell and causes irritation, and the oyster throws a sort of 
enamelling round it, and this makes the pearl. The universe of experience is 
our own enamel, so to say, and the real universe is the parasite serving as 
nucleus. The ordinary man will never understand it, because when he tries to 
do so, he throws out an enamel, and sees only his own enamel. Now we 
understand what is meant by these Vrittis. The real man is behind the mind; 
the mind is the instrument in his hands; it is his intelligence that is 
percolating through the mind. It is only when you stand behind the mind that 
it becomes intelligent. When man gives it up, it falls to pieces and is 
nothing. Thus you understand what is meant by Chitta. It is the mind - stuff, 
and Vrittis are the waves and ripples rising in it when external causes 
impinge on it. These Vrittis are our universe.

The bottom of a lake we cannot see, because its surface is covered with 
ripples. It is only possible for us to catch a glimpse of the bottom, when the 
ripples have subsided, and the water is calm. If the water is muddy or is 
agitated all the time, the bottom will not be seen. If it is clear, and there are 
no waves, we shall see the bottom. The bottom of the lake is our own true 
Self; the lake is the Chitta and the waves the Vrittis. Again, the mind is in 
three states, one of which is darkness, called Tamas, found in brutes and 
idiots; it only acts to injure. No other idea comes into that state of mind. 
Then there is the active state of mind, Rajas, whose chief motives are power 
and enjoyment. "I will be powerful and rule others." Then there is the state 
called Sattva, serenity, calmness, in which the waves cease, and the water of 
the mind - lake becomes clear. It is not inactive, but rather intensely active. 

72

Raja Yoga

It is the greatest manifestation of power to be calm. It is easy to be active. 
Let the reins go, and the horses will run away with you. Anyone can do that, 
but he who can stop the plunging horses is the strong man. Which requires 
the greater strength, letting go or restraining? The calm man is not the man 
who is dull. You must not mistake Sattva for dullness or laziness. The calm 
man is the one who has control over the mind waves. Activity is the 
manifestation of inferior strength, calmness, of the superior.

The Chitta is always trying to get back to its natural pure state, but the 
organs draw it out. To restrain it, to check this outward tendency, and to start 
it on the return journey to the essence of intelligence is the first step in Yoga, 
because only in this way can the Chitta get into its proper course.

Although the Chitta is in every animal, from the lowest to the highest, it is 
only in the human form that we find it as the intellect. Until the mind - stuff 
can take the form of intellect it is not possible for it to return through all 
these steps, and liberate the soul. Immediate salvation is impossible for the 
cow or the dog, although they have mind, because their Chitta cannot as yet 
take that form which we call intellect.

The Chitta manifests itself in the following forms -- scattering, darkening, 
gathering, one - pointed, and concentrated. The scattering form is activity. 
Its tendency is to manifest in the form of pleasure or of pain. The darkening 
form is dullness which tends to injury. The commentator says, the third form 
is natural to the Devas, the angels, and the first and second to the demons. 
The gathering form is when it struggles to centre itself. The one - pointed 
form is when it tries to concentrate, and the concentrated form is what brings 
us to Samadhi. 

3. At that time (the time of concentration) the seer (Purusha) rests in his 
own (unmodified) state.

As soon as the waves have stopped, and the lake has become quiet, we see 
its bottom. So with the mind; when it is calm, we see what our own nature 
is; we do not mix ourselves but remain our own selves.

73

Raja Yoga

4. At other times (other than that of concentration) the seer is identified 
with the modifications.

For instance, someone blames me; this produces a modification, Vritti, in 
my mind, and I identify myself with it, and the result is misery. 

5. There are five classes of modifications, (some) painful and (others) 
not painful. 

6. (These are) right knowledge, indiscrimination, verbal delusion, sleep, 
and memory. 

7. Direct perception, inference, and competent evidence are proofs.

When two of our perceptions do not contradict each other, we call it proof. I 
hear something, and if it contradicts something already perceived, I begin to 
fight it out, and do not believe it. There are also three kinds of proof. 
Pratyaksha, direct perception; whatever we see and feel, is proof, if there has 
been nothing to delude the senses. I see the world; that is sufficient proof 
that it exists. Secondly, Anumana, inference; you see a sign, and from the 
sign you come to the thing signified. Thirdly, Aptavakya, the direct evidence 
of the Yogis, of those who have seen the truth. We are all of us struggling 
towards knowledge. But you and I have to struggle hard, and come to 
knowledge through a long tedious process of reasoning, but the Yogi, the 
pure one, has gone beyond all this. Before his mind, the past, the present, 
and the future are alike, one book for him to read; he does not require to go 
through the tedious processes for knowledge we have to; his words are 
proof, because he sees knowledge in himself. These, for instance, are the 
authors of the sacred scriptures; therefore the scriptures are proof. If any 
such persons are living now their words will be proof.

Other philosophers go into long discussions about Aptavakya and they say, 
"What is the proof of their words?" The proof is their direct perception. 
Because whatever I see is proof, and whatever you see is proof, if it does not 
contradict any past knowledge. There is knowledge beyond the senses, and 
whenever it does not contradict reason and past human experience, that 
knowledge is proof. Any madman may come into this room and say he sees 

74

Raja Yoga

angels around him; that would not be proof. In the first place, it must be true 
knowledge, and secondly, it must not contradict past knowledge, and thirdly, 
it must depend upon the character of the man who gives it out. I hear it said 
that the character of the man is not of so much importance as what he may 
say; we must first hear what he says. This may be true in other things. A 
man may be wicked, and yet make an astronomical discovery, but in religion 
it is different, because no impure man will ever have the power to reach the 
truths of religion. Therefore we have first of all to see that the man who 
declares himself to be an Apta is a perfectly unselfish and holy person; 
secondly, that he has reached beyond the senses; and thirdly, that what he 
says does not contradict the past knowledge of humanity. Any new 
discovery of truth does not contradict the past truth, but fits into it. And 
fourthly, that truth must have a possibility of verification. If a man says, "I 
have seen a vision," and tells me that I have no right to see it, I believe him 
not. Everyone must have the power to see it for himself. No one who sells 
his knowledge is an Apta. All these conditions must be fulfilled; you must 
first see that the man is pure, and that he has no selfish motive; that he has 
no thirst for gain or fame. Secondly, he must show that he is superconscious. 
He must give us something that we cannot get from our senses, and which is 
for the benefit of the world. Thirdly, we must see that it does not contradict 
other truths; if it contradicts other scientific truths reject it at once. Fourthly, 
the man should never be singular; he should only represent what all men can 
attain. The three sorts of proof are, then, direct sense - perception, inference, 
and the words of an Apta. I cannot translate this word into English. It is not 
the word "inspired", because inspiration is believed to come from outside, 
while this knowledge comes from the man himself. The literal meaning is 
"attained." 

8. Indiscrimination is false knowledge not established in real nature.

The next class of Vrittis that arises is mistaking one thing for another, as a 
piece of mother - of - pearl is taken for a piece of silver.

9. Verbal delusion follows from words having no (corresponding) 
reality.

75

Raja Yoga

There is another class of Vrittis called Vikalpa. A word is uttered, and we do 
not wait to consider its meaning; we jump to a conclusion immediately. It is 
the sign of weakness of the Chitta. Now you can understand the theory of 
restraint. The weaker the man, the less he has of restraint. Examine 
yourselves always by that test. When you are going to be angry or miserable, 
reason it out how it is that some news that has come to you is throwing your 
mind into Vrittis.

10. Sleep is a Vritti which embraces the feeling of voidness.

The next class of Vrittis is called sleep and dream. When we awake, we 
know that we have been sleeping; we can only have memory of perception. 
That which we do not perceive we never can have any memory of.

Every reaction is a wave in the lake. Now, if, during sleep, the mind had no 
waves, it would have no perceptions, positive or negative, and, therefore, we 
would not remember them. The very reason of our remembering sleep is that 
during sleep there was a certain class of waves in the mind. Memory is 
another class of Vrittis which is called Smriti. 

11. Memory is when the (Vrittis of) perceived subjects do not slip away 
(and through impressions come back to consciousness.

Memory can come from direct perception, false knowledge, verbal delusion, 
and sleep. For instance, you hear a word. That word is like a stone thrown 
into the lake of the Chitta; it causes a ripple, and that ripple rouses a series of 
ripples; this is memory. So in sleep. When the peculiar kind of ripple called 
sleep throws the Chitta into a ripple of memory, it is called a dream. Dream 
is another form of the ripple which in the waking state is called memory.

12. Their control is by practice and non - attachment.

The mind, to have non - attachment, must be clear, good, and rational. Why 
should we practise? Because each action is like the pulsations quivering over 
the surface of the lake. The vibration dies out, and what is left? The 
Samskaras, the impressions. When a large number of these impressions are 
left on the mind, they coalesce and become a habit. It is said, "Habit is 

76

Raja Yoga

second nature", it is first nature also, and the whole nature of man; 
everything that we are is the result of habit. That gives us consolation, 
because, if it is only habit, we can make and unmake it at any time. The 
Samskaras are left by these vibrations passing out of our mind, each one of 
them leaving its result. Our character is the sum - total of these marks, and 
according as some particular wave prevails one takes that tone. If good 
prevails, one becomes good; if wickedness, one becomes wicked; if 
joyfulness, one becomes happy. The only remedy for bad habits is counter 
habits; all the bad habits that have left their impressions are to be controlled 
by good habits. Go on doing good, thinking holy thoughts continuously; that 
is the only way to suppress base impressions. Never say any man is 
hopeless, because he only represents a character, a bundle of habits, which 
can be checked by new and better ones. Character is repeated habits, and 
repeated habits alone can reform character. 

13. Continuous struggle to keep them (the Vrittis) perfectly restrained is 
practice.

What is practice? The attempt to restrain the mind in Chitta form, to prevent 
its going out into waves.

14. It becomes firmly grounded by long constant efforts with great love 
(for the end to be attained).

Restraint does not come in one day, but by long continued practice.

15. That effect which comes to those who have given up their thirst after 
objects, either seen or heard, and which wills to control the objects, is 
non - attachment.

The two motive powers of our actions are (1) what we see ourselves, (2) the 
experience of others. These two forces throw the mind, the lake, into various 
waves. Renunciation is the power of battling against these forces and 
holding the mind in check. Their renunciation is what we want. I am passing 
through a street, and a man comes and takes away my watch. That is my 
own experience. I see it myself, and it immediately throws my Chitta into a 
wave, taking the form of anger. Allow not that to come. If you cannot 

77

Raja Yoga

prevent that, you are nothing; if you can, you have Vairagya. Again, the 
experience of the worldly - minded teaches us that sense - enjoyments are 
the highest ideal. These are tremendous temptations. To deny them, and not 
allow the mind to come to a wave form with regard to them, is renunciation; 
to control the twofold motive powers arising from my own experience and 
from the experience of others, and thus prevent the Chitta from being 
governed by them, is Vairagya. These should be controlled by me, and not I 
by them. This sort of mental strength is called renunciation. Vairagya is the 
only way to freedom. 

16. That is extreme non - attachment which gives up even the qualities, 
and comes from the knowledge of (the real nature of) the Purusha.

It is the highest manifestation of the power of Vairagya when it takes away 
even our attraction towards the qualities. We have first to understand what 
the Purusha, the Self, is and what the qualities are. According to Yoga 
philosophy, the whole of nature consists of three qualities or forces; one is 
called Tamas, another Rajas, and the third Sattva. These three qualities 
manifest themselves in the physical world as darkness or inactivity, 
attraction or repulsion, and equilibrium of the two. Everything that is in 
nature, all manifestations, are combinations and recombinations of these 
three forces. Nature has been divided into various categories by the 
Sankhyas; the Self of man is beyond all these, beyond nature. It is effulgent, 
pure, and perfect. Whatever of intelligence we see in nature is but the 
reflection of this Self upon nature. Nature itself is insentient. You must 
remember that the word nature also includes the mind; mind is in nature; 
thought is in nature; from thought, down to the grossest form of matter, 
everything is in nature, the manifestation of nature. This nature has covered 
the Self of man, and when nature takes away the covering, the self appears 
in Its own glory. The non - attachment, as described in aphorism 15 (as 
being control of objects or nature) is the greatest help towards manifesting 
the Self. The next aphorism defines Samadhi, perfect concentration, which is 
the goal of the Yogi. 

17. The concentration called right knowledge is that which is followed 
by reasoning, discrimination, bliss, unqualified egoism.

78

Raja Yoga

Samadhi is divided into two varieties. One is called the Samprajnata, and the 
other the Asamprajnata. In the Samprajnata Samadhi come all the powers of 
controlling nature. It is of four varieties. The first variety is called the 
Savitarka, when the mind meditates upon an object again and again, by 
isolating it from other objects. There are two sorts of objects for meditation 
in the twenty - five categories of the Sankhyas, (1) the twenty - four 
insentient categories of Nature, and (2) the one sentient Purusha. This part of 
Yoga is based entirely on Sankhya philosophy, about which I have already 
told you. As you will remember, egoism and will and mind have a common 
basis, the Chitta or the mind - stuff, out of which they are all manufactured. 
The mind - stuff takes in the forces of nature, and projects them as thought. 
There must be something, again, where both force and matter are one.

This is called Avyakta, the unmanifest state of nature before creation, and to 
which, after the end of a cycle, the whole of nature returns, to come out 
again after another period. Beyond that is the Purusha, the essence of 
intelligence. Knowledge is power, and as soon as we begin to know a thing, 
we get power over it; so also when the mind begins to meditate on the 
different elements, it gains power over them. That sort of meditation where 
the external gross elements are the objects is called Savitarka. Vitarka means 
question; Savitarka, with question, questioning the elements, as it were, that 
they may give their truths and their powers to the man who meditates upon 
them. There is no liberation in getting powers. It is a worldly search after 
enjoyments, and there is no enjoyment in this life; all search for enjoyment 
is vain; this is the old, old lesson which man finds so hard to learn. When he 
does learn it, he gets out of the universe and becomes free. The possession of 
what are called occult powers is only intensifying the world, and in the end, 
intensifying suffering. Though as a scientist Patanjali is bound to point out 
the possibilities of this science, he never misses an opportunity to warn us 
against these powers.

Again, in the very same meditation, when one struggles to take the elements 
out of time and space, and think of them as they are, it is called Nirvitarka, 
without question. When the meditation goes a step higher, and takes the 
Tanmatras as its object, and thinks of them as in time and space, it is called 
Savichara, with discrimination; and when in the same meditation one 
eliminates time and space, and thinks of the fine elements as they are, it is 

79

Raja Yoga

called Nirvichara, without discrimination. The next step is when the 
elements are given up, both gross and fine, and the object of meditation is 
the interior organ, the thinking organ. When the thinking organ is thought of  
as bereft of the qualities of activity and dullness, it is then called

Sananda, the blissful Samadhi. When the mind itself is the object of 
meditation, when meditation becomes very ripe and concentrated, when all 
ideas of the gross and fine materials are given up, when the Sattva state only 
of the Ego remains, but differentiated from all other objects, it is called 
Sasmita Samadhi. The man who has attained to this has attained to what is 
called in the Vedas "bereft of body". He can think of himself as without his 
gross body; but he will have to think of himself as with a fine body. Those 
that in this state get merged in nature without attaining the goal are called 
Prakritilayas, but those who do not stop even there reach the goal, which is 
freedom. 

18. There is another Samadhi which is attained by the constant practice 
of cessation of all mental activity, in which the Chitta retains only the 
unmanifested impressions.

This is the perfect superconscious Asamprajnata Samadhi, the state which 
gives us freedom. The first state does not give us freedom, does not liberate 
the soul. A man may attain to all powers, and yet fall again. There is no 
safeguard until the soul goes beyond nature. It is very difficult to do so, 
although the method seems easy. The method is to meditate on the mind 
itself, and whenever thought comes, to strike it down, allowing no thought to 
come into the mind, thus making it an entire vacuum. When we can really do 
this, that very moment we shall attain liberation. When persons without 
training and preparation try to make their minds vacant, they are likely to 
succeed only in covering themselves with Tamas, the material of ignorance, 
which make the mind dull and stupid, and leads them to think that they are 
making a vacuum of the mind. To be able to really do that is to manifest the 
greatest strength, the highest control. When this state, Asamprajnata, 
superconsciousness, is reached, the Samadhi becomes seedless. What is 
meant by that? In a concentration where there is consciousness, where the 
mind succeeds only in quelling the waves in the Chitta and holding them 
down, the waves remain in the form of tendencies. These tendencies (or 

80

Raja Yoga

seeds) become waves again, when the time comes. But when you have 
destroyed all these tendencies, almost destroyed the mind, then the Samadhi 
becomes seedless; there are no more seeds in the mind out of which to 
manufacture again and again this plant of life, this ceaseless round of birth 
and death.

You may ask, what state would that be in which there is no mind, there is no 
knowledge? What we call knowledge is a lower state than the one beyond 
knowledge. You must always bear in mind that the extremes look very much 
alike. If a very low vibration of ether is taken as darkness, an intermediate 
state as light, very high vibration will be darkness again. Similarly, 
ignorance is the lowest state, knowledge is the middle state, and beyond 
knowledge is the highest state, the two extremes of which seem the same. 
Knowledge itself is a manufactured something, a combination; it is not 
reality.

What is the result of constant practice of this higher concentration? All old 
tendencies of restlessness and dullness will be destroyed, as well as the 
tendencies of goodness too. The case is similar to that of the chemicals used 
to take the dirt and alloy off gold. When the ore is smelted down, the dross is 
burnt along with the chemicals. So this constant controlling power will stop 
the previous bad tendencies, and eventually, the good ones also. Those good 
and evil tendencies will suppress each other, leaving alone the Soul, in its 
own splendour untrammelled by either good or bad, the omnipresent, 
omnipotent, and omniscient. Then the man will know that he had neither 
birth nor death, nor need for heaven or earth. He will know that he neither 
came nor went, it was nature which was moving, and that movement was 
reflected upon the soul. The form of the light reflected by the glass upon the 
wall moves, and the wall foolishly thinks it is moving. So with all of us; it is 
the Chitta constantly moving making itself into various forms, and we think 
that we are these various forms. All these delusions will vanish. When that 
free Soul will command -- not pray or beg, but command -- then whatever It 
desires will be immediately fulfilled; whatever It wants It will be able to do. 
According to the Sankhya philosophy, there is no God. It says that there can 
be no God of this universe, because if there were one, He must be a soul, and 
a soul must be either bound or free. How can the soul that is bound by 
nature, or controlled by nature, create? It is itself a slave. On the other hand, 

81

Raja Yoga

why should the Soul that is free create and manipulate all these things? It has 
no desires, so it cannot have any need to create. Secondly, it says the theory 
of God is an unnecessary one; nature explains all. What is the use of any 
God? But Kapila teaches that there are many souls, who, though nearly 
attaining perfection, fall short because they cannot perfectly renounce all 
powers. Their minds for a time merge in nature, to re - emerge as its masters. 
Such gods there are. We shall all become such gods, and, according to the 
Sankhyas, the God spoken of in the Vedas really means one of these free 
souls. Beyond them there is not an eternally free and blessed Creator of the 
universe. On the other hand, the Yogis say, "Not so, there is a God; there is 
one Soul separate from all other souls, and He is the eternal Master of all 
creation, the ever free, the Teacher of all teachers." The Yogis admit that 
those whom the Sankhyas call "the merged in nature" also exist. They are 
Yogis who have fallen short of perfection, and though, for a time, debarred 
from attaining the goal, remain as rulers of parts of the universe. 

19. (This Samadhi when not followed by extreme non - attachment) 
becomes the cause of the re - manifestation of the gods and of those that 
become merged in nature.

The gods in the Indian systems of philosophy represent certain high offices 
which are filled successively by various souls. But none of them is perfect.

20. To others (this Samadhi) comes through faith, energy, memory, 
concentration, and discrimination of the real.

These are they who do not want the position of gods or even that of rulers of 
cycles. They attain to liberation.

21. Success is speedy for the extremely energetic.

22. The success of Yogis differs according as the means they adopt are 
mild, medium, or intense.

23. Or by devotion to Ishvara.

82

Raja Yoga

24. Ishvara (the Supreme Ruler) is a special Purusha, untouched by 
misery, actions, their results, and desires.

We must again remember that the Patanjala Yoga philosophy is based upon 
the Sankhya philosophy; only in the latter there is no place for God, while 
with the Yogis God has a place. The Yogis, however, do not mention many 
ideas about God, such as creating. God as the Creator of the universe is not 
meant by the Ishvara of the Yogis. According to the Vedas, Ishvara is the 
Creator of the universe; because it is harmonious, it must be the 
manifestation of one will. The Yogis want to establish a God, but they arrive 
at Him in a peculiar fashion of their own. They say: 

25. In Him becomes infinite that all - knowingness which in others is 
(only) a germ.

The mind must always travel between two extremes. You can think of 
limited space, but that very idea gives you also unlimited space. Close your 
eyes and think of a little space; at the same time that you perceive the little 
circle, you have a circle round it of unlimited dimensions. It is the same with 
time. Try to think of a second; you will have, with the same act of 
perception, to think of time which is unlimited. So with knowledge. 
Knowledge is only a germ in man, but you will have to think of infinite 
knowledge around it, so that the very constitution of our mind shows us that 
there is unlimited knowledge, and the Yogis call that unlimited knowledge 
God.

26. He is the Teacher of even the ancient teachers, being not limited by 
time.

It is true that all knowledge is within ourselves, but this has to be called forth 
by another knowledge. Although the capacity to know is inside us, it must 
be called out, and that calling out of knowledge can only be done, a Yogi 
maintains, through another knowledge. Dead, insentient matter never calls 
out knowledge, it is the action of knowledge that brings out knowledge. 
Knowing beings must be with us to call forth what is in us, so these teachers 
were always necessary. The world was never without them, and no 
knowledge can come without them. God is the Teacher of all teachers, 

83

Raja Yoga

because these teachers, however great they may have been -- gods or angels 
-- were all bound and limited by time, while God is not. There are two 
peculiar deductions of the Yogis. The first is that in thinking of the limited, 
the mind must think of the unlimited; and that if one part of that perception 
is true, so also must the other be, for the reason that their value as 
perceptions of the mind is equal. The very fact that man has a little 
knowledge shows that God has unlimited knowledge. If I am to take one, 
why not the other? Reason forces me to take both or reject both. If I believe 
that there is a man with a little knowledge, I must also admit that there is 
someone behind him with unlimited knowledge. The second deduction is 
that no knowledge can come without a teacher. It is true, as the modern 
philosophers say, that there is something in man which evolves out of him; 
all knowledge is in man, but certain environments are necessary to call it 
out. We cannot find any knowledge without teachers. If there are men 
teachers, god teachers, or angel teachers, they are all limited; who was the 
teacher before them. We are forced to admit, as a last conclusion, one 
teacher who is not limited by time; and that One Teacher of infinite 
knowledge, without beginning or end, is called God. 

27. His manifesting word is Om.

Every idea that you have in the mind has a counterpart in a word; the word 
and the thought are inseparable. The external part of one and the same thing 
is what we call word, and the internal part is what we call  thought. No man 
can, by analysis, separate thought from word. The idea that language was 
created by men -- certain men sitting together and deciding upon words, has 
been proved to be wrong. So long as man has existed there have been words 
and language. What is the connection between an idea and a word? Although 
we see that there must always be a word with a thought, it is not necessary 
that the same thought requires the same word. The thought may be the same 
in twenty different countries, yet the language is different. We must have a 
word to express each thought, but these words need not necessarily have the 
same sound. Sounds will vary in different nations. Our commentator says, 
"Although the relation between thought and word is perfectly natural, yet it 
does not mean a rigid connection between one sound and one idea." These 
sounds vary, yet the relation between the sounds and the thoughts is a 
natural one. The connection between thoughts and sounds is good only if 

84

Raja Yoga

there be a real connection between the thing signified and the symbol; until 
then that symbol will never come into general use. A symbol is the 
manifester of the thing signified, and if the thing signified has already an 
existence, and if, by experience, we know that the symbol has expressed that 
thing many times, then we are sure that there is a real relation between them. 
Even if the things are not present, there will be thousands who will know 
them by their symbols. There must be a natural connection between the 
symbol and the thing signified; then, when that symbol is pronounced, it 
recalls the thing signified. The commentator says the manifesting word of 
God is Om. Why does he emphasise this word? There are hundreds of words 
for God. One thought is connected with a thousand words; the idea "God" is 
connected with hundreds of words, and each one stands as a symbol for God. 
Very good. But there must be a generalisation among all these words, some 
substratum, some common ground of all these symbols, and that which is the 
common symbol will be the best, and will really represent them all. In 
making a sound we use the larynx and the palate as a sounding board. Is 
there any material sound of which all other sounds must be manifestations, 
one which is the most natural sound? Om (Aum) is such a sound, the basis 
of all sounds. The first letter, A, is the root sound, the key, pronounced 
without touching any part of the tongue or palate; M represents the last 
sound in the series, being produced by the closed lips, and the U rolls from 
the very root to the end of the sounding board of the mouth. Thus, Om 
represents the whole phenomena of sound - producing. As such, it must be 
the natural symbol, the matrix of all the various sounds. It denotes the whole 
range and possibility of all the words that can be made. Apart from these 
speculations, we see that around this word Om are centred all the different 
religious ideas in India; all the various religious ideas of the Vedas have 
gathered themselves round this word Om. What has that to do with America 
and England, or any other country? Simply this, that the word has been 
retained at every stage of religious growth in India, and it has been 
manipulated to mean all the various ideas about God. Monists, dualists, 
mono - dualists, separatists, and even atheists took up this Om. Om has 
become the one symbol for the religious aspiration of the vast majority of 
human beings. Take, for instance, the English word God. It covers only a 
limited function, and if you go beyond it, you have to add adjectives, to 
make it Personal, or Impersonal, or Absolute God. So with the words for 

85

Raja Yoga

God in every other language; their signification is very small. This word 
Om, however, has around it all the various significances. As such it should 
be accepted by everyone.

28. The repetition of this (Om) and meditating on its meaning (is the 
way).

Why should there be repetition? We have not forgotten the theory of 
Samskaras, that the sum - total of impressions lives in the mind. They 
become more and more latent but remain there, and as soon as they get the 
right stimulus, they come out. Molecular vibration never ceases. When this 
universe is destroyed, all the massive vibrations disappear; the sun, moon, 
stars, and earth, melt down; but the vibrations remain in the atoms. Each 
atom performs the same function as the big worlds do. So even when the 
vibrations of the Chitta subside, its molecular vibrations go on, and when 
they get the impulse, come out again. We can now understand what is meant 
by repetition. It is the greatest stimulus that can be given to the spiritual 
Samskaras. "One moment of company with the holy makes a ship to cross 
this ocean of life." Such is the power of association. So this repetition of 
Om, and thinking of its meaning, is keeping good company in your own 
mind. Study, and then meditate on what you have studied. Thus light will 
come to you, the Self will become manifest.

But one must think of Om, and of its meaning too. Avoid evil company, 
because the scars of old wounds are in you, and evil company is just the 
thing that is necessary to call them out. In the same way we are told that 
good company will call out the good impressions that are in us, but which 
have become latent. There is nothing holier in the world than to keep good 
company, because the good impressions will then tend to come to the 
surface. 

29. From that is gained (the knowledge of) introspection, and the 
destruction of obstacles.

The first manifestation of the repetition and thinking of Om is that the 
introspective power will manifest more and more, all the mental and 
physical obstacles will begin to vanish. What are the obstacles to the Yogi? 

86

Raja Yoga

30. Disease, mental laziness, doubt, lack of enthusiasm, lethargy, 
clinging to sense - enjoyments, false perception, non - attaining 
concentration, and falling away from the state when obtained, are the 
obstructing distractions.

Disease. This body is the boat which will carry us to the other shore of the 
ocean of life. It must be taken care of. Unhealthy persons cannot be Yogis. 
Mental laziness makes us lose all lively interest in the subject, without 
which there will neither be the will nor the energy to practise. Doubts will 
arise in the mind about the truth of the science, however strong one's 
intellectual conviction may be, until certain peculiar psychic experiences 
come, as hearing or seeing at a distance, etc. These glimpses strengthen the 
mind and make the student persevere. Falling away...when obtained. Some 
days or weeks when you are practising, the mind will be calm and easily 
concentrated, and you will find yourself progressing fast. All of a sudden the 
progress will stop one day, and you will find yourself, as it were, stranded. 
Persevere. All progress proceeds by such rise and fall. 

31. Grief, mental distress, tremor of the body, irregular breathing, 
accompany non - retention of concentration.

Concentration will bring perfect repose to mind and body every time it is 
practised. When the practice has been misdirected, or not enough controlled, 
these disturbances come. Repetition of Om and self - surrender to the Lord 
will strengthen the mind, and bring fresh energy. The nervous shakings will 
come to almost everyone. Do not mind them at all, but keep on practising. 
Practice will cure them, and make the seat firm. 

32. To remedy this, the practice of one subject (should be made).

Making the mind take the form of one object for some time will destroy 
these obstacles. This is general advice. In the following aphorisms it will be 
expanded and particularised. As one practice cannot suit everyone, various 
methods will be advanced, and everyone by actual experience will find out 
that which helps him most.

87

Raja Yoga

33. Friendship, mercy, gladness, and indifference, being thought of in 
regard to subjects, happy, unhappy, good, and evil respectively, pacify 
the Chitta.

We must have these four sorts of ideas. We must have friendship for all; we 
must be merciful towards those that are in misery; when people are happy, 
we ought to be happy; and to the wicked we must be indifferent. So with all 
subjects that come before us. If the subject is a good one, we shall feel 
friendly towards it; if the subject of thought is one that is miserable, we must 
be merciful towards it. If it is good, we must be glad; if it is evil, we must be 
indifferent. These attitudes of the mind towards the different subjects that 
come before it will make the mind peaceful. Most of our difficulties in our 
daily lives come from being unable to hold our minds in this way. For 
instance, if a man does evil to us, instantly we want to react evil, and every 
reaction of evil shows that we are not able to hold the Chitta down; it comes 
out in waves towards the object, and we lose our power. Every reaction in 
the form of hatred or evil is so much loss to the mind; and every evil thought 
or deed of hatred, or any thought of reaction, if it is controlled, will be laid in 
our favour. It is not that we lose by thus restraining ourselves; we are 
gaining infinitely more than we suspect. Each time we suppress hatred, or a 
feeling of anger, it is so much good energy stored up in our favour; that 
piece of energy will be converted into the higher powers. 

34. By throwing out and restraining the Breath.

The word used is Prana. Prana is not exactly breath. It is the name for the 
energy that is in the universe. Whatever you see in the universe, whatever 
moves or works, or has life, is a manifestation of this Prana. The sum - total 
of the energy displayed in the universe is called Prana. This Prana, before a 
cycle begins, remains in an almost motionless state; and when the cycle 
begins, this Prana begins to manifest itself. It is this Prana that is manifested 
as motion -- as the nervous motion in human beings or animals; and the 
same Prana is manifesting as thought, and so on. The whole universe is a 
combination of Prana and Akasha; so is the human body. Out of Akasha you 
get the different materials that you feel and see, and out of Prana all the 
various forces. Now this throwing out and restraining the Prana is what is 
called Pranayama. Patanjali, the father of the Yoga philosophy, does not 

88

Raja Yoga

give very many particular directions about Pranayama, but later on other 
Yogis found out various things about this Pranayama, and made of it a great 
science. With Patanjali it is one of the many ways, but he does not lay much 
stress on it. He means that you simply throw the air out, and draw it in, and 
hold it for some time, that is all, and by that, the mind will become a little 
calmer. But, later on, you will find that out of this is evolved a particular 
science called Pranayama. We shall hear a little of what these later Yogis 
have to say.

Some of this I have told you before, but a little repetition will serve to fix it 
in your minds. First, you must remember that this Prana is not the breath; but 
that which causes the motion of the breath, that which is the vitality of the 
breath, is the Prana. Again, the word Prana is used for all the senses; they are 
all called Pranas, the mind is called Prana; and so we see that Prana is force. 
And yet we cannot call it force, because force is only the manifestation of it. 
It is that which manifests itself as force and everything else in the way of 
motion. The Chitta, the mind - stuff, is the engine which draws in the Prana 
from the surroundings, and manufactures out of Prana the various vital 
forces -- those that keep the body in preservation -- and thought, will, and all 
other powers. By the above - mentioned process of breathing we can control 
all the various motions in the body, and the various nerve currents that are 
running through the body. First we begin to recognise them, and then we 
slowly get control over them.

Now, these later Yogis consider that there are three main currents of this 
Prana in the human body. One they call Ida, another Pingala, and the third 
Sushumna. Pingala, according to them, is on the right side of the spinal 
column, and the Ida on the left, and in the middle of the spinal column is the 
Sushumna, an empty channel. Ida and Pingala, according to them, are the 
currents working in every man, and through these currents, we are 
performing all the functions of life. Sushumna is present in all, as a 
possibility; but it works only in the Yogi. You must remember that Yoga 
changes the body. As you go on practising, your body changes; it is not the 
same body that you had before the practice. That is very rational, and can be 
explained, because every new thought that we have must make, as it were, a 
new channel through the brain, and that explains the tremendous 
conservatism of human nature. Human nature likes to run through the ruts 

89

Raja Yoga

that are already there, because it is easy. If we think, just for example's sake, 
that the mind is like a needle, and the brain substance a soft lump before it, 
then each thought that we have makes a street, as it were, in the brain, and 
this street would close up, but for the grey matter which comes and makes a 
lining to keep it separate. If there were no grey matter, there would be no 
memory, because memory means going over these old streets, retracing a 
thought as it were. Now perhaps you have marked that when one talks on 
subjects in which one takes a few ideas that are familiar to everyone, and 
combines and recombines them, it is easy to follow because these channels 
are present in everyone's brain, and it is only necessary to recur them. But 
whenever a new subject comes, new channels have to be made, so it is not 
understood readily. And that is why the brain (it is the brain, and not the 
people themselves) refuses unconsciously to be acted upon by new ideas. It 
resists. The Prana is trying to make new channels, and the brain will not 
allow it. This is the secret of conservatism. The fewer channels there have 
been in the brain, and the less the needle of the Prana has made these 
passages, the more conservative will be the brain, the more it will struggle 
against new thoughts. The more thoughtful the man, the more complicated 
will be the streets in his brain, and the more easily he will take to new ideas, 
and understand them. So with every fresh idea, we make a new impression 
in the brain, cut new channels through the brain - stuff, and that is why we 
find that in the practice of Yoga (it being an entirely new set of thoughts and 
motives) there is so much physical resistance at first. That is why we find 
that the part of religion which deals with the world - side of nature is so 
widely accepted, while the other part, the philosophy, or the psychology, 
which deals with the inner nature of man, is so frequently neglected.

We must remember the definition of this world of ours; it is only the Infinite 
Existence projected into the plane of consciousness. A little of the Infinite is 
projected into consciousness, and that we call our world. So there is an 
Infinite beyond; and religion has to deal with both -- with the little lump we 
call our world, and with the Infinite beyond. Any religion which deals with 
one only of these two will be defective. It must deal with both. The part of 
religion which deals with the part of the Infinite which has come into the 
plane of consciousness, got itself caught, as it were, in the plane of 
consciousness, in the cage of time, space, and causation, is quite familiar to 

90

Raja Yoga

us, because we are in that already, and ideas about this world have been with 
us almost from time immemorial. The part of religion which deals with the 
Infinite beyond comes entirely new to us, and getting ideas about it produces 
new channels in the brain, disturbing the whole system, and that is why you 
find in the practice of Yoga ordinary people are at first turned out of their 
grooves. In order to lessen these disturbances as much as possible, all these 
methods are devised by Patanjali, that we may practise any one of them best 
suited to us. 

35. Those forms of concentration that bring extraordinary sense - 
perceptions cause perseverance of the mind.

This naturally comes with Dharana, concentration; the Yogis say, if the 
mind becomes concentrated on the tip of the nose, one begins to smell, after 
a few days, wonderful perfumes. If it becomes concentrated at the root of the 
tongue, one begins to hear sounds; if on the tip of the tongue, one begins to 
taste wonderful flavours; if on the middle of the tongue, one feels as if one 
were coming in contact with something. If one concentrates one's mind on 
the palate, one begins to see peculiar things. If a man whose mind is 
disturbed wants to take up some of these practices of Yoga, yet doubts the 
truth of them, he will have his doubts set at rest when, after a little practice, 
these things come to him, and he will persevere. 

36. Or (by the meditation on) the Effulgent Light, which is beyond all 
sorrow.

This is another sort of concentration. Think of the lotus of the heart, with 
petals downwards, and running through it, the Sushumna; take in the breath, 
and while throwing the breath out imagine that the lotus is turned with the 
petals upwards, and inside that lotus is an effulgent light. Meditate on that. 

37. Or (by meditation on) the heart that has given up all attachment to 
sense - objects.

91

Raja Yoga

Take some holy person, some great person whom you revere, some saint 
whom you know to be perfectly non-attached, and think of his heart. That 
heart has become non-attached, and meditate on that heart; it will calm the 
mind. If you cannot do that, there is the next way:

38. Or by meditating on the knowledge that comes in sleep.

Sometimes a man dreams that he has seen angels coming to him and talking 
to him, that he is in an ecstatic condition, that he has heard music floating 
through the air. He is in a blissful condition in that dream, and when he 
wakes, it makes a deep impression on him. Think of that dream as real, and 
meditate upon it. If you cannot do that, meditate on any holy thing that 
pleases you.

39. Or by the meditation on anything that appeals to one as good.

This does not mean any wicked subject, but anything good that you like, any 
place that you like best, any scenery that you like best, any idea that you like 
best, anything that will concentrate the mind.  

40. The Yogi's mind thus meditating, becomes unobstructed from the 
atomic to the infinite.

The mind, by this practice, easily contemplates the most minute, as well as 
the biggest thing. Thus the mind - waves become fainter. 

41. The Yogi whose Vrittis have thus become powerless (controlled) 
obtains in the receiver, (the instrument of) receiving, and the received 
(the Self, the mind, and external objects), concentratedness and 
sameness like the crystal (before different coloured objects).

What results from this constant meditation? We must remember how in a 
previous aphorism Patanjali went into the various states of meditation, how 
the first would be the gross, the second the fine, and from them the advance 
was to still finer objects. The result of these meditations is that we can 
meditate as easily on the fine as on the gross objects. Here the Yogi sees the 
three things, the receiver, the received, and the receiving instrument, 

92

Raja Yoga

corresponding to the Soul, external objects, and the mind. There are three 
objects of meditation given us. First, the gross things, as bodies, or material 
objects; second, fine things, as the mind, the Chitta; and third, the Purusha 
qualified, not the Purusha itself, but the Egoism. By practice, the Yogi gets 
established in all these meditations. Whenever he meditates he can keep out 
all other thoughts; he becomes identified with that on which he meditates. 
When he meditates, he is like a piece of crystal. Before flowers the crystal 
becomes almost identified with the flowers. If the flower is red, the crystal 
looks red, or if the flower is blue, the crystal looks blue. 

42. Sound, meaning, and resulting knowledge, being mixed up, is 
(called) Samadhi with question.

Sound here means vibration, meaning the nerve currents which conduct it; 
and knowledge, reaction. All the various meditations we have had so far, 
Patanjali calls Savitarka (meditation with question). Later on he gives us 
higher and higher Dhyanas. In these that are called "with question," we keep 
the duality of subject and object, which results from the mixture of word, 
meaning, and knowledge. There is first the external vibration, the word. 
This, carried inward by the sense currents, is the meaning. After that there 
comes a reactionary wave in the Chitta, which is knowledge, but the mixture 
of these three makes up what we call knowledge. In all the meditations up to 
this we get this mixture as objects of meditation. The next Samadhi is 
higher. 

43. The Samadhi called "without question" (comes) when the memory is 
purified, or devoid of qualities, expressing only the meaning (of the 
meditated object).

It is by the practice of meditation of these three that we come to the state 
where these three do not mix. We can get rid of them. We will first try to 
understand what these three are. Here is the Chitta; you will always 
remember the simile of the mind - stuff to a lake, and the vibration, the 
word, the sound, like a pulsation coming over it. You have that calm lake in 
you, and I pronounce a word, "Cow". As soon as it enters through your ears 
there is a wave produced in your Chitta along with it. So that wave 
represents the idea of the cow, the form or the meaning as we call it. The 

93

Raja Yoga

apparent cow that you know is really the wave in the mind - stuff that comes 
as a reaction to the internal and external sound vibrations. With the sound,  
the wave dies away; it can never exist without a word. You may ask how it 
is, when we only think of the cow, and do not hear a sound. You make that 
sound yourself. You are saying "cow" faintly in your mind, and with that 
comes a wave. There cannot be any wave without this impulse of sound; and 
when it is not from outside, it is from inside, and when the sound dies, the 
wave dies. What remains? The result of the reaction, and that is knowledge. 
These three are so closely combined in our mind that we cannot separate 
them. When the sound comes, the senses vibrate, and the wave rises in 
reaction; they follow so closely upon one another that there is no discerning 
one from the other. When this meditation has been practised for a long time, 
memory, the receptacle of all impressions, becomes purified, and we are 
able clearly to distinguish them from one another. This is called Nirvitarka, 
concentration without question. 

44. By this process, (the concentrations) with discrimination and 
without discrimination, whose objects are finer, are (also) explained.

A process similar to the preceding is applied again; only, the objects to be 
taken up in the former meditations are gross; in this they are fine. 

45. The finer objects end with the Pradhana.

The gross objects are only the elements and everything manufactured out of 
them. The fine objects begin with the Tanmatras or fine particles. The 
organs, the mind,[1] egoism, the mind - stuff (the cause of all manifestation), 
the equilibrium state of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas materials -- called 
Pradhana (chief), Prakriti (nature), or Avyakta (unmanifest)-- are all 
included within the category of fine objects, the Purusha (the Soul) along 
being excepted. 

46. These concentrations are with seed.

These do not destroy the seeds of past actions, and thus cannot give 
liberation, but what they bring to the Yogi is stated in the following 
aphorism. 

94

Raja Yoga

47. The concentration "without discrimination" being purified, the 
Chitta becomes firmly fixed. 

48. The knowledge in that is called "filled with Truth".

The next aphorism will explain this.

49. The knowledge that is gained from testimony and inference is about 
common objects. That from the Samadhi just mentioned is of a much 
higher order, being able to penetrate where inference and testimony 
cannot go.

The idea is that we have to get our knowledge or ordinary objects by direct 
perception, and by inference therefrom, and from testimony of people who 
are competent. By "people who are competent," the Yogis always mean the 
Rishis, or the Seers of the thoughts recorded in the scriptures -- the Vedas. 
According to them, the only proof of the scriptures is that they were the 
testimony of competent persons, yet they say the scriptures cannot take us to 
realisation. We can read all the Vedas, and yet will not realise anything, but 
when we practise their teachings, then we attain to that state which realises 
what the scriptures say, which penetrates where neither reason nor 
perception nor inference can go, and where the testimony of others cannot 
avail. This is what is meant by the aphorism.

Realisation is real religion, all the rest is only preparation -- hearing lectures, 
or reading books, or reasoning is merely preparing the ground; it is not 
religion. Intellectual assent and intellectual dissent are not religion. The 
central idea of the Yogis is that just as we come in direct contact with 
objects of the senses, so religion even can be directly perceived in a far more 
intense sense. The truths of religion, as God and Soul, cannot be perceived 
by the external senses. I cannot see God with my eyes, nor can I touch Him 
with my hands, and we also know that neither can we reason beyond the 
senses. Reason leaves us at a point quite indecisive; we may reason all our 
lives, as the world has been doing for thousands of years, and the result is 
that we find we are incompetent to prove or disprove the facts of religion. 
What we perceive directly we take as the basis, and upon that basis we 
reason. So it is obvious that reasoning has to run within these bounds of 

95

Raja Yoga

perception. It can never go beyond. The whole scope of realisation, 
therefore, is beyond sense - perception. The Yogis say that man can go 
beyond his direct sense - perception, and beyond his reason also. Man has in 
him the faculty, the power, of transcending his intellect even, a power which 
is in every being, every creature. by the practice of Yoga that power is 
aroused, and then man transcends the ordinary limits of reason, and directly 
perceives things which are beyond all reason. 

50. The resulting impression from this Samadhi obstructs all other 
impressions.

We have seen in the foregoing aphorism that the only way of attaining to 
that superconsciousness is by concentration, and we have also seen that what 
hinders the mind from concentration are the past Samskaras, impressions. 
All of you have observed that, when you are trying to concentrate your 
mind, your thoughts wander. When you are trying to think of God, that is the 
very time these Samskaras appear. At other times they are not so active; but 
when you want them not, they are sure to be there, trying their best to crowd 
in your mind. Why should that be so? Why should they be much more 
potent at the time of concentration? It is because you are repressing them, 
and they react with all their force. At other times they do not react. How 
countless these old past impressions must be, all lodged somewhere in the 
Chitta, ready, waiting like tigers, to jump up! These have to be suppressed 
that the one idea which we want may arise, to the exclusion of the others. 
Instead they are all struggling to come up at the same time. These are the 
various powers of the Samskaras in hindering concentration of the mind. So 
this Samadhi which has just been given is the best to be practised, on 
account of its power of suppressing the Samskaras. The Samskara which 
will be raised by this sort of concentration will be so powerful that it will 
hinder the action of the others, and hold them in check. 

51. By the restraint of even this (impression, which obstructs all other 
impressions), all being restrained, comes the "seedless" Samadhi.

You remember that our goal is to perceive the Soul itself. We cannot 
perceive the Soul, because it has got mingled up with nature, with the mind, 
with the body. The ignorant man thinks his body is the Soul. The learned 

96

Raja Yoga

man thinks his mind is the Soul. But both of them are mistaken. What makes 
the Soul get mingled up with all this? Different waves in the Chitta rise and 
cover the Soul; we only see a little reflection of the Soul through these 
waves; so, if the wave is one of anger, we see the Soul as angry; "I am 
angry," one says. If it is one of love, we see ourselves reflected in that wave, 
and say we are loving. If that wave is one of weakness, and the Soul is 
reflected in it, we think we are weak. These various ideas come from these 
impressions, these Samskaras covering the Soul. The real nature of the Soul 
is not perceived as long as there is one single wave in the lake of the Chitta; 
this real nature will never be perceived until all the waves  have subsided. So, 
first, Patanjali teaches us the meaning of these waves; secondly, the best way 
to repress them; and thirdly, how to make one wave so strong as to suppress 
all other waves, fire eating fire as it were. When only one remains, it will be 
easy to suppress that also, and when that is gone, this Samadhi or 
concentration is called seedless. It leaves nothing, and the Soul is manifested 
just as It is, in Its own glory. Then alone we know that the Soul is not a 
compound; It is the only eternal simple in the universe, and as such, It 
cannot be born, It cannot die; It is immortal, indestructible, the ever - living 
essence of intelligence.

References

1. The mind, or common sensorium, the aggregate of all the senses.

97

Raja Yoga

Concentration: Its Practice

1. Mortification, study, and surrendering fruits of work to God are 
called Kriya-Yoga.

Those Samadhis with which we ended our last chapter are very difficult to 
attain; so we must take them up slowly. The first step, the preliminary step, 
is called Kriya-Yoga. Literally this means work, working towards Yoga. The 
organs are the horses, the mind is the rein, the intellect is the charioteer, the 
soul is the rider, and the body is the chariot. The master of the household, 
the King, the Self of man, is sitting in this chariot. If the horses are very 
strong and do not obey the rein, if the charioteer, the intellect, does not know 
how to control the horses, then the chariot will come to grief. But if the 
organs, the horses, are well controlled, and if the rein, the mind, is well held 
in the hands of the charioteer, the intellect, the chariot reaches the goal. 
What is meant, therefore, by this mortification? Holding the rein firmly 
while guiding the body and the organs; not letting them do anything they 
like, but keeping them both under proper control. Study. What is meant by 
study in this case? No study of novels or story books, but study of those 
works which teach the liberation of the Soul. Then again this study does not 
mean controversial studies at all. The Yogi is supposed to have finished his 
period of controversy. He has had enough of that, and has become satisfied. 
He only studies to intensify his convictions. Vada and Siddhanta -- these are 
the two sorts of scriptural knowledge -- vada (the argumentative) and 
Siddhanta (the decisive). When a man is entirely ignorant he takes up the 
first of these, the argumentative fighting, and reasoning pro and con; and 
when he has finished that he takes up the Siddhanta, the decisive, arriving at 
a conclusion. Simply arriving at this conclusion will not do. It must be 
intensified. Books are infinite in number, and time is short; therefore the 
secret of knowledge is to take what is essential. Take that and try to live up 
to it. There is an old Indian legend that if you place a cup of milk and water 
before a Raja Hamsa (swan), he will take all the milk and leave the water. In 
that way we should take what is of value in knowledge, and leave the dross. 
Intellectual gymnastics are necessary at first. We must not go blindly into 
anything. The Yogi has passed the argumentative state, and has come to a 

98

Raja Yoga

conclusion, which is, like the rocks, immovable. The only thing he now 
seeks to do is to intensify that conclusion. Do not argue, he says; if one 
forces arguments upon you, be silent. Do not answer any argument, but go 
away calmly, because arguments only disturb the mind. The only thing 
necessary is to train the intellect, what is the use of disturbing it for nothing? 
The intellect is but a weak instrument, and can give us only knowledge 
limited by the senses. The Yogi wants to go beyond the senses, therefore 
intellect is of no use to him. He is certain of this and, therefore, is silent, and 
does not argue. Every argument throws his mind out of balance, creates a 
disturbance in the Chitta, and a disturbance is a drawback. Argumentations 
and searchings of the reason are only by the way. There are much higher 
things beyond them. The whole of life is not for school boy fights and 
debating societies. "Surrendering the fruits of work to God" is to take to 
ourselves neither credit nor blame, but to give up both to the Lord and be at 
peace. 

2. (It is for) the practice of Samadhi and minimising the pain - bearing 
obstructions.

Most of us make our minds like spoilt children, allowing them to do 
whatever they want. Therefore it is necessary that Kriya-Yoga should be 
constantly practised, in order to gain control of the mind, and bring it into 
subjection. The obstructions to Yoga arise from lack of control, and cause us 
pain. They can only be removed by denying the mind, and holding it in 
check, through the means of Kriya-Yoga. 

3. The pain - bearing obstructions are -- ignorance, egoism, attachment, 
aversion, and clinging to life.

These are the five pains, the fivefold tie that binds us down, of which 
ignorance is the cause and the other four its effects. It is the only cause of all 
our misery. What else can make us miserable? The nature of the Soul is 
eternal bliss. What can make it sorrowful except ignorance, hallucination, 
delusion? All pain of the Soul is simply delusion. 

4. Ignorance is the productive field of all these that follow, whether they 
are dormant, attenuated, overpowered, or expanded.

99

Raja Yoga

Ignorance is the cause of egoism, attachment, aversion, and clinging to life. 
These impressions exist in different states. They are sometimes dormant. 
You often hear the expression "innocent as a baby," yet in the baby may be 
the state of a demon or of a god, which will come out by degrees. In the 
Yogi, these impressions, the Samskaras left by past actions, are attenuated, 
that is, exist in a very fine state, and he can control them, and not allow them 
to become manifest. "Overpowered" means that sometimes one set of 
impressions is held down for a while by those that are stronger, but they 
come out when that repressing cause is removed. The last state is the 
"expanded," when the Samskaras, having helpful surroundings, attain to a 
great activity, either as good or evil. 

5. Ignorance is taking the non - eternal, the impure, the painful, and the 
non - self for the eternal, the pure, the happy, and the Atman or Self 
(respectively).

All the different sorts of impressions have one source, ignorance. We have 
first to learn what ignorance is. All of us think, "I am the body, and not the 
Self, the pure, the effulgent, the ever blissful," and that is ignorance. We 
think of man, and see man as body. This is the great delusion. 

6. Egoism is the identification of the seer with the instrument of seeing.

The seer is really the Self, the pure one, the ever holy, the infinite, the 
immortal. This is the Self of man. And what are the instruments? The Chitta 
or mind-stuff, the Buddhi or determinative faculty, the Manas or mind, and 
the Indriyas or sense-organs. These are the instruments for him to see the 
external world, and the identification of the Self with the instruments is what 
is called the ignorance of egoism. We say, "I am the mind," "I am thought," 
"I am angry," or "I am happy". How can we be angry and how can we hate? 
We should identify ourselves with the Self that cannot change. If It is 
unchangeable, how can It be one moment happy, and one moment unhappy? 
It is formless, infinite, omnipresent. What can change It? It is beyond all 
law. What can affect It? Nothing in the universe can produce an effect on It. 
Yet through ignorance, we identify ourselves with the mind - stuff, and think 
we feel pleasure or pain. 

100

7. Attachment is that which dwells on pleasure.

Raja Yoga

We find pleasure in certain things, and the mind like a current flows towards 
them; and this following the pleasure centre, as it were, is what is called 
attachment. We are never attached where we do not find pleasure. We find 
pleasure in very queer things sometimes, but the principle remains: wherever 
we find pleasure, there we are attached. 

8. Aversion is that which dwells on pain.

That which gives us pain we immediately seek to get away from. 

9. Flowing through its own nature, and established even in the learned, 
is the clinging to life.

This clinging to life you see manifested in every animal. Upon it many 
attempts have been made to build the theory of a future life, because men are 
so fond of life that they desire a future life also. Of course it goes without 
saying that this argument is without much value, but the most curious part of 
it is, that, in Western countries, the idea that this clinging to life indicates a 
possibility of future life applies only to men, but does not include animals. 
In India this clinging to life has been one of the arguments to prove past 
experience and existence. For instance, if it be true that all our knowledge 
has come from experience, then it is sure that that which we never 
experienced we cannot imagine or understand. As soon as chickens are 
hatched they begin to pick up food. Many times it has been seen, where 
ducks have been hatched by hens, that, as soon as they came out of the eggs 
they flew to water, and the mother thought they would be drowned. If 
experience be the only source of knowledge, where did these chickens learn 
to pick up food, or the ducklings that the water was their natural element? If 
you say it is instinct, it means nothing -- it is simply giving a word, but is no 
explanation. What is this instinct? We have many instincts in ourselves. For 
instance, most of you ladies play the piano, and remember, when you first 
learned, how carefully you had to put your fingers on the black and white 
keys, one after the other, but now, after long years of practice, you can talk 
with your friends while your fingers play mechanically. It has become 
instinct. So with every work we do; by practice it becomes instinct, it 

101

Raja Yoga

becomes automatic; but so far as we know, all the cases which we now 
regard as automatic are degenerated reason. In the language of the Yogi, 
instinct is involved reason. Discrimination becomes involved, and gets to be 
automatic Samskaras. Therefore it is perfectly logical to think that all we call  
instinct in this world is simply involved reason. As reason cannot come 
without experience, all instinct is, therefore, the result of past experience. 
Chickens fear the hawk, and ducklings love the water; these are both the 
results of past experience. Then the question is whether that experience 
belongs to a particular soul, or to the body simply, whether this experience 
which comes to the duck is the duck's forefathers' experience, or the duck's 
own experience. Modern scientific men hold that it belongs to the body, but 
the Yogis hold that it is the experience of the mind, transmitted through the 
body. This is called the theory of reincarnation.

We have seen that all our knowledge, whether we call
it perception, or reason, or instinct, must come through that one channel 
called experience, and all that we now call instinct is the result of past 
experience, degenerated into instinct and that instinct regenerates into reason 
again. So on throughout the universe, and upon this has been built one of the 
chief arguments for reincarnation in India. The recurring experiences of 
various fears, in course of time, produce this clinging to life. That is why the 
child is instinctively afraid, because the past experience of pain is there in it. 
Even in the most learned men, who know that this body will go, and who 
say "never mind, we have had hundreds of bodies, the soul cannot die"-- 
even in them, with all their intellectual convictions,  we still find this clinging 
on to life. Why is this clinging to life? We have seen that it has become 
instinctive. In the psychological language of the Yogis it has become a 
Samskara. The Samskaras, fine and hidden, are sleeping in the Chitta. All 
this past experience of death, all that which we call instinct, is experience 
become subconscious. It lives in the Chitta, and is not inactive, but is 
working underneath.

The Chitta - Vrittis, the mind - waves, which are gross, we can appreciate 
and feel; they can be more easily controlled, but what about the finer 
instincts? How can they be controlled? When I am angry, my whole mind 
becomes a huge wave of anger. I feel it, see it, handle it, can easily 
manipulate it, can fight with it; but I shall not succeed perfectly in the fight 

102

Raja Yoga

until I can get down below to its causes. A man says something very harsh to 
me, and I begin to feel that I am getting heated, and he goes on till I am 
perfectly angry and forget myself, identify myself with anger. When he first 
began to abuse me, I thought, "I am going to be angry". Anger was one 
thing, and I was another; but when I became angry, I was anger. These 
feelings have to be controlled in the germ, the root, in their fine forms, 
before even we have become conscious that they are acting on us. With the 
vast majority of mankind the fine states of these passions are not even 
known -- the states in which they emerge from subconsciousness. When a 
bubble is rising from the bottom of the lake, we do not see it, nor even when 
it is nearly come to the surface; it is only when it bursts and makes a ripple 
that we know it is there. We shall only be successful in grappling with the 
waves when we can get hold of them in their fine causes, and until you can 
get hold of them, and subdue them before they become gross, there is no 
hope of conquering any passion perfectly. To control our passions we have 
to control them at their very roots; then alone shall we be able to burn out 
their very seeds. As fried seeds thrown into the ground will never come up, 
so these passions will never arise. 

10. The fine Samskaras are to be conquered by resolving them into their 
causal state.

Samskaras are the subtle impressions that manifest themselves into gross 
forms later on. How are these fine Samskaras to be controlled? By resolving 
the effect into its cause. When the Chitta, which is an effect, is resolved into 
its cause, Asmita or Egoism, then only, the fine impressions die along with 
it. Meditation cannot destroy these. 

11. By meditation, their (gross) modifications are to be rejected.

Meditation is one of the great means of controlling the rising of these waves. 
By meditation you can make the mind subdue these waves, and if you go on 
practising meditation for days, and months, and years, until it has become a 
habit, until it will come in spite of yourself, anger and hatred will be 
controlled and checked. 

103

Raja Yoga

12. The "receptacle of works" has its root in these pain - bearing 
obstructions, and their experience is in this visible life, or in the unseen 
life.

By the "receptacle of works" is meant the sum - total of Samskaras. 
Whatever work we do, the mind is thrown into a wave, and after the work is 
finished, we think the wave is gone. No. It has only become fine, but it is 
still there. When we try to remember the work, it comes up again and 
becomes a wave. So it was there; if not, there would not have been memory. 
Thus every action, every thought, good or bad, just goes down and becomes 
fine, and is there stored up. Both happy and unhappy thoughts are called 
pain - bearing obstructions, because according to the Yogis, they, in the long 
run, bring pain. All happiness which comes from the senses will, eventually, 
bring pain. All enjoyment will make us thirst for more, and that brings pain 
as its result. There is no limit to man's desires; he goes on desiring, and 
when he comes to a point where desire cannot be fulfilled, the result is pain. 
Therefore the Yogis regard the sum - total of the impressions, good or evil, 
as pain - bearing obstructions; they obstruct the way to freedom of the Soul.

It is the same with the Samskaras, the fine roots of all our works; they are 
the causes which will again bring effects, either in this life, or in the lives to 
come. In exceptional cases when these Samskaras are very strong, they bear 
fruit quickly; exceptional acts of wickedness, or of goodness, bring their 
fruits even in this life. The Yogis hold that men who are able to acquire a 
tremendous power of good Samskaras do not have to die, but, even in this 
life, can change their bodies into god - bodies. There are several such cases 
mentioned by the Yogis in their books. These men change the very material 
of their bodies; they re - arrange the molecules in such fashion that they have 
no more sickness, and what we call death does not come to them. Why 
should not this be? The physiological meaning of food is assimilation of 
energy from the sun. The energy has reached the plant, the plant is eaten by 
an animal, and the animal by man. The science of it is that we take so much 
energy from the sun, and make it part of ourselves. That being the case, why 
should there be only one way of assimilating energy? The plant's way is not 
the same as ours; the earth's process of assimilating energy differs from our 
own. But all assimilate energy in some form or other. The Yogis say that 
they are able to assimilate energy by the power of the mind alone, that they 

104

Raja Yoga

can draw in as much of it as they desire without recourse to the ordinary 
methods. As a spider makes its web out of its own substance, and becomes 
bound in it, and cannot go anywhere except along the lines of that web, so 
we have projected out of our own substance this network called the nerves, 
and we cannot work except through the channels of those nerves. The Yogi 
says we need not be bound by that.

Similarly, we can send electricity to any part of the world, but we have to 
send it by means of wires. Nature can send a vast mass of electricity without 
any wires at all. Why cannot we do the same? We can send mental 
electricity. What we call mind is very much the same as electricity. It is clear 
that this nerve fluid has some amount of electricity, because it is polarised, 
and it answers all electrical directions. We can only send our electricity 
through these nerve channels. Why not send the mental electricity without 
this aid? The Yogis say it is perfectly possible and practicable, and that 
when you can do that, you will work all over the universe. You will be able 
to work with any body anywhere, without the help of the nervous system. 
When the soul is acting through these channels, we say a man is living, and 
when these cease to work, a man is said to be dead. But when a man is able 
to act either with or without these channels, birth and death will have no 
meaning for him. All the bodies in the universe are made up of Tanmatras, 
their difference lies in the arrangement of the latter. If you are the arranger, 
you can arrange a body in one way or another. Who makes up this body but 
you? Who eats the food? If another ate the food for you, you would not live 
long. Who makes the blood out of food? You, certainly. Who purifies the 
blood, and sends it through the veins? You. We are the masters of the body, 
and we live in it. Only we have lost the knowledge of how to rejuvenate it. 
We have become automatic, degenerate. We have forgotten the process of 
arranging its molecules. So, what we do automatically has to be done 
knowingly. We are the masters and we have to regulate that arrangement; 
and as soon as we can do that, we shall be able to rejuvenate just as we like, 
and then we shall have neither birth nor disease nor death. 

13. The root being there, the fruition comes (in the form of) species, life, 
and experience of pleasure and pain.

105

Raja Yoga

The roots, the causes, the Samskaras being there, they manifest and form the 
effects. The cause dying down becomes the effect; the effect getting subtler 
becomes the cause of the next effect. A tree bears a seed, which becomes the 
cause of another tree, and so on. All our works now are the effects of past 
Samskaras; again, these works becoming Samskaras will be the causes of 
future actions, and thus we go on. So this aphorism says that the cause being 
there, the fruit must come, in the form of species of beings: one will be a 
man, another an angel, another an animal, another a demon. Then there are 
different effects of Karma in life. One man lives fifty years, another a 
hundred, another dies in two years, and never attains maturity; all these 
differences in life are regulated by past Karma. One man is born, as it were, 
for pleasure; if he buries himself in a forest, pleasure will follow him there. 
Another man, wherever he goes, is followed by pain; everything becomes 
painful for him. It is the result of their own past. According to the 
philosophy of the Yogis, all virtuous actions bring pleasure, and all vicious 
actions bring pain. Any man who does wicked deeds is sure to reap their 
fruit in the form of pain. 

14. They bear fruit as pleasure or pain, caused by virtue or vice.

15. To the discriminating, all is, as it were, painful on account of 
everything bringing pain either as consequence, or as anticipation of 
loss of happiness, or as fresh craving arising from impressions of 
happiness, and also as counteraction of qualities.

The Yogis say that the man who has discriminating powers, the man of good 
sense, sees through all that are called pleasure and pain, and knows that they 
come to all, and that one follows and melts into the other; he sees that men 
follow an ignis fatuus all their lives, and never succeed in fulfilling their 
desires. The great king Yudhishthira once said that the most wonderful thing 
in life is that every moment we see people dying around us, and yet we think 
we shall never die. Surrounded by fools on every side, we think we are the 
only exceptions, the only learned men. Surrounded by all sorts of 
experiences of fickleness, we think our love is the only lasting love. How 
can that be? Even love is selfish, and the Yogi says that in the end we shall 
find that even the love of husbands and wives, and children and friends, 
slowly decays. Decadence seizes everything in this life. It is only when 

106

Raja Yoga

everything, even love, fails, that, with a flash, man finds out how vain, how 
dream - like is this world. Then he catches a glimpse of Vairagya 
(renunciation), catches a glimpse of the Beyond. It is only by giving up this 
world that the other comes; never through holding on to this one. Never yet 
was there a great soul who had not to reject sense - pleasures and 
enjoyments to acquire his greatness. The cause of misery is the clash 
between the different forces of nature, one dragging one way, and another 
dragging another, rendering permanent happiness impossible. 

16. The misery which is not yet come is to be avoided.

Some Karma we have worked out already, some we are working out now in 
the present, and some are waiting to bear fruit in the future. The first kind is 
past and gone. The second we will have to work out, and it is only that 
which is waiting to bear fruit in the future that we can conquer and control, 
towards which end all our forces should be directed. This is what Patanjali 
means when he says that Samskaras are to be controlled by resolving them 
into their causal state. 

17. The cause of that which is to be avoided is the junction of the seer 
and the seen.

Who is the seer? The Self of man, the Purusha. What is the seen? The whole 
of nature beginning with the mind, down to gross matter. All pleasure and 
pain arise from the junction between this Purusha and the mind. The 
Purusha, you must remember, according to this philosophy, is pure; when 
joined to nature, it appears to feel pleasure or pain by reflection. 

18. The experienced is composed of elements and organs, is of the 
nature of illumination, action, and inertia, and is for the purpose of 
experience and release (of the experiencer).

The experienced, that is nature, is composed of elements and organs -- the 
elements, gross and fine, which compose the whole of nature, and the organs 
of the senses, mind, etc.-- and is of the nature of illumination (Sattva), action 
(Rajas), and inertia (Tamas). What is the purpose of the whole of nature? 
That the Purusha may gain experience. The Purusha has, as it were, 

107

Raja Yoga

forgotten its mighty, godly nature. There is a story that the king of the gods, 
Indra, once became a pig, wallowing in mire; he had a she - pig and a lot of 
baby pigs, and was very happy. Then some gods saw his plight, and came to 
him, and told him, "You are the king of the gods, you have all the gods 
under your command. Why are you here?" But Indra said, "Never mind; I 
am all right here; I do not care for heaven, while I have this sow and these 
little pigs." The poor gods were at their wits' end. After a time they decided 
to to slay all the pigs one after another. When all were dead, Indra began to 
weep and mourn. Then the gods ripped his pig - body open and he came out 
of it, and began to laugh, when he realised what a hideous dream he had had 
-- he, the king of the gods, to have become a pig, and to think that that pig - 
life was the only life! Not only so, but to have wanted the whole universe to 
come into the pig - life! The Purusha, when it identifies itself with nature, 
forgets that it is pure and infinite. The Purusha does not love, it is love itself. 
It does not exist, it is existence itself. The Soul does not know, It is 
knowledge itself. It is a mistake to say the Soul loves, exists, or knows. 
Love, existence, and knowledge are not the qualities of the Purusha, but its 
essence. When they get reflected upon something, you may call them the 
qualities of that something. They are not the qualities but the essence of the 
Purusha, the great Atman, the Infinite Being, without birth or death, 
established in its own glory. It appears to have become so degenerate that if 
you approach to tell it, "You are not a pig," it begins to squeal and bite.

Thus is it with us all in this Maya, this dream world, where it is all misery, 
weeping and crying, where a few golden balls are rolled, and the world 
scrambles after them. You were never bound by laws, nature never had a 
bond for you. That is what the Yogi tells you. Have patience to learn it. And 
the Yogi shows how, by junction with nature, and identifying itself with the 
mind and the world, the Purusha thinks itself miserable. Then the Yogi goes 
on to show you that the way out is through experience. You have to get all 
this experience, but finish it quickly. We have placed ourselves in this net, 
and will have to get out. We have got ourselves caught in the trap, and we 
will have to work out our freedom. So get this experience of husbands, and 
wives, and friends, and little loves; you will get through them safely if you 
never forget what you really are. Never forget this is only a momentary state, 
and that we have to pass through it. Experience is the one great teacher -- 

108

Raja Yoga

experience of pleasure and pain -- but know it is only experience. It leads, 
step by step, to that state where all things become small, and the Purusha so 
great that the whole universe seems as a drop in the ocean and falls off by its 
own nothingness. We have to go through different experiences, but let us 
never forget the ideal. 

19. The states of the qualities are the defined, the undefined, the 
indicated only, and the signless.

The system of Yoga is built entirely on the philosophy of the Sankhyas, as I 
told you before, and here again I shall remind you of the cosmology of the 
Sankhya philosophy. According to the Sankhyas, nature is both the material 
and the efficient cause of the universe. In nature there are three sorts of 
materials, the Sattva, the Rajas, and the Tamas. The Tamas material is all 
that is dark, all that is ignorant and heavy. The Rajas is activity. The Sattva 
is calmness, light. Nature, before creation, is called by them Avyakta, 
undefined, or indiscrete; that is, in which there is no distinction of form or 
name, a state in which these three materials are held in perfect balance. Then 
the balance is disturbed, the three materials begin to mingle in various 
fashions, and the result is the universe. In every man, also, these three 
materials exist. When the Sattva material prevails, knowledge comes; when 
Rajas, activity; and when Tamas, darkness, lassitude, idleness, and 
ignorance. According to the Sankhya theory, the highest manifestation of 
nature, consisting of the three materials, is what they call Mahat or 
intelligence, universal intelligence, of which each human intellect is a part. 
In the Sankhya psychology there is a sharp distinction between Manas, the 
mind function, and the function of the Buddhi, intellect. The mind function 
is simply to collect and carry impressions and present them to the Buddhi, 
the individual Mahat, which determines upon it. Out of Mahat comes 
egoism, out of which again come the fine materials. The fine materials 
combine and become the gross materials outside -- the external universe. 
The claim of the Sankhya philosophy is that beginning with the intellect 
down to a block of stone, all is the product of one substance, different only 
as finer to grosser states of existence. The finer is the cause, and the grosser 
is the effect. According to the Sankhya philosophy, beyond the whole of 
nature is the Purusha, which is not material at all. Purusha is not at all 
similar to anything else, either Buddhi, or mind, or the Tanmatras, or the 

109

Raja Yoga

gross materials. It is not akin to any one of these, it is entirely separate, 
entirely different in its nature, and from this they argue that the Purusha 
must be immortal, because it is not the result of combination. That which is 
not the result of combination cannot die. The Purushas or souls are infinite 
in number.

Now we shall understand the aphorism that the states of the qualities are 
defined, undefined, indicated only, and signless. By the "defined" are meant 
the gross elements, which we can sense. By the "undefined" are meant the 
very fine materials, the Tanmatras, which cannot be sensed by ordinary men. 
If you practise Yoga, however, says Patanjali, after a while your perceptions 
will become so fine that you will actually see the Tanmatras. For instance, 
you have heard how every man has a certain light about him; every living 
being emits a certain light, and this, he says, can be seen by the Yogi. We do 
not all see it, but we all throw out these Tanmatras, just as a flower 
continuously sends out fine particles which enable us to smell it. Every day 
of our lives we throw out a mass of good or evil, and everywhere we go the 
atmosphere is full of these materials. That is how there came to the human 
mind, unconsciously, the idea of building temples and churches. Why should 
man build churches in which to worship God?

Why not worship Him anywhere? Even if he did not know the reason, man 
found that the place where people worshipped God became full of good 
Tanmatras. Every day people go there, and the more they go the holier they 
get, and the holier that place becomes. If any man who has not much Sattva 
in him goes there, the place will influence him and arouse his Sattva quality. 
Here, therefore, is the significance of all temples and holy places, but you 
must remember that their holiness depends on holy people congregating 
there. The difficulty with man is that he forgets the original meaning, and 
puts the cart before the horse. It was men who made these places holy, and 
then the effect became the cause and made men holy. If the wicked only 
were to go there, it would become as bad as any other place. It is not the 
building, but the people that make a church, and that is what we always 
forget. That is why sages and holy persons, who have much of this Sattva 
quality, can send it out and exert a tremendous influence day and night on 
their surroundings. A man may become so pure that his purity will become 
tangible. Whosoever comes in contact with him becomes pure.

110

Raja Yoga

Next "the indicated only" means the Buddhi, the intellect. "The indicated 
only" is the first manifestation of nature; from it all other manifestations 
proceed. The last is "the signless". There seems to be a great difference 
between modern science and all religions at this point. Every religion has the 
idea that the universe comes out of intelligence. The theory of God, taking it 
in its psychological significance, apart from all ideas of personality, is that 
intelligence is first in the order of creation, and that out of intelligence 
comes what we call gross matter. Modern philosophers say that intelligence 
is the last to come. They say that unintelligent things slowly evolve into 
animals, and from animals into men. They claim that instead of everything 
coming out of intelligence, intelligence itself is the last to come. Both the 
religious and the scientific statements, though seeming directly opposed to 
each other are true. Take an infinite series, A -- B -- A -- B -- A -- B, etc. 
The question is -- which is first, A or B? If you take the series as A -- B, you 
will say that A is first, but if you take it as B -- A, you will say that B is first. 
It depends upon the way we look at it. Intelligence undergoes modification 
and becomes the gross matter, this again merges into intelligence, and thus 
the process goes on. The Sankhyas, and other religionists, put intelligence  
first, and the series becomes intelligence, then matter. The scientific man 
puts his finger on matter, and says matter, then intelligence. They both 
indicate the same chain. Indian philosophy, however, goes beyond both 
intelligence and matter, and finds a Purusha, or Self, which is beyond 
intelligence, of which intelligence is but the borrowed light. 

20. The seer is intelligence only, and though pure, sees through the 
colouring of the intellect.

This is, again, Sankhya philosophy. We have seen from the same philosophy 
that from the lowest form up to intelligence all is nature; beyond nature are 
Purushas (souls), which have no qualities. Then how does the soul appear to 
be happy or unhappy? By reflection. If a red flower is put near a piece of 
pure crystal, the crystal appears to be red, similarly the appearances of 
happiness or unhappiness of the soul are but reflections., The soul itself has 
no colouring. The soul is separate from nature. Nature is one thing, soul 
another, eternally separate. The Sankhyas say that intelligence is a 
compound, that it grows and wanes, that it changes, just as the body 
changes, and that its nature is nearly the same as that of the body. As a 

111

Raja Yoga

finger - nail is to the body, so is body to intelligence. The nail is a part of the 
body, but it can be pared off hundreds of times, and the body will still last. 
Similarly, the intelligence lasts aeons, while this body can be "pared off," 
thrown off. Yet intelligence cannot be immortal because it changes -- 
growing and waning. Anything that changes cannot be immortal. Certainly 
intelligence is manufactured, and that very fact shows us that there must be 
something beyond that. It cannot be free, everything connected with matter 
is in nature, and, therefore, bound for ever. Who is free? The free must 
certainly be beyond cause and effect. If you say that the idea of freedom is a 
delusion, I shall say that the idea of bondage is also a delusion. Two facts 
come into our consciousness, and stand or fall with each other. These are our 
notions of bondage and freedom. If we want to go through a wall, and our 
head bumps against that wall, we see we are limited by that wall. At the 
same time we find a will power, and think we can direct our will 
everywhere. At every step these contradictory ideas come to us. We have to 
believe that we are free, yet at every moment we find we are not free. If one 
idea is a delusion, the other is also a delusion, and if one is true, the other 
also is true, because both stand upon the same basis -- consciousness. The 
Yogi says, both are true; that we are bound so far as intelligence goes, that 
we are free so far as the soul is concerned. It is the real nature of man, the 
soul, the Purusha, which is beyond all law of causation. Its freedom is 
percolating through layers of matter in various forms, intelligence, mind, etc. 
It is its light which is shining through all. Intelligence has no light of its 
own. Each organ has a particular centre in the brain; it is not that all the  
organs have one centre; each organ is separate. Why do all perceptions 
harmonise? Where do they get their unity? If it were in the brain, it would be 
necessary for all the organs, the eyes, the nose, the ears, etc., to have one 
centre only, while we know for certain that there are different centres for 
each. Both a man can see and hear at the same time, so a unity must be there 
at the back of intelligence. Intelligence is connected with the brain, but 
behind intelligence even stands the Purusha, the unit, where all different 
sensations and perceptions join and become one. The soul itself is the centre 
where all the different perceptions converge and become unified. That soul 
is free, and it is its freedom that tells you every moment that you are free. 
But you mistake, and mingle that freedom every moment with intelligence 
and mind. You try to attribute that freedom to the intelligence, and 

112

Raja Yoga

immediately find that intelligence is not free; you attribute that freedom to 
the body, and immediately nature tells you that you are again mistaken. That 
is why there is this mingled sense of freedom and bondage at the same time. 
The Yogi analyses both what is free and what is bound, and his ignorance 
vanishes. He finds that the Purusha is free, is the essence of that knowledge 
which, coming through the Buddhi, becomes intelligence, and, as such, is 
bound. 

21. The nature of the experienced is for him.

Nature has no light of its own. As long as the Purusha is present in it, it 
appears as light. But the light is borrowed; just as the moon's light is 
reflected. According to the Yogis, all the manifestations of nature are caused 
by nature itself, but nature has no purpose in view, except to free the 
Purusha. 

22. Though destroyed for him whose goal has been gained, yet it is not 
destroyed, being common to others.

The whole activity of nature is to make the soul know that it is entirely 
separate from nature. When the soul knows this, nature has no more 
attractions for it. But the whole of nature vanishes only for that man who has 
become free. There will always remain an infinite number of others, for 
whom nature will go on working. 

23. Junction is the cause of the realisation of the nature of both the 
powers, the experienced and its Lord.

According to this aphorism, both the powers of soul and nature become 
manifest when they are in conjunction. Then all manifestations are thrown 
out. Ignorance is the cause of this conjunction. We see every day that the 
cause of our pain or pleasure is always our joining ourselves with the body. 
If I were perfectly certain that I am not this body, I should take no notice of 
heat and cold, or anything of the kind. This body is a combination. It is only 
a fiction to say that I have one body, you another, and the sun another. The 
whole universe is one ocean of matter, and you are the name of a little 
particle, and I of another, and the sun of another. We know that this matter is 

113

Raja Yoga

continuously changing. What is forming the sun one day, the next day may 
form the matter of our bodies. 

24. Ignorance is its cause.

Through ignorance we have joined ourselves with a particular body, and 
thus opened ourselves to misery. This idea of body is a simple superstition. 
It is superstition that makes us happy or unhappy. It is superstition caused by 
ignorance that makes us feel heat and cold, pain and pleasure. It is our 
business to rise above this superstition, and the Yogi shows us how we can 
do this. It has been demonstrated that, under certain mental conditions, a 
man may be burned, yet he will feel no pain. The difficulty is that this 
sudden upheaval of the mind comes like a whirlwind one minute, and goes 
away the next. If, however, we gain it through Yoga, we shall permanently 
attain to the separation of Self from the body. 

25. There being absence of that (ignorance) there is absence of junction, 
which is the thing - to - be - avoided; that is the independence of the 
seer.

According to yoga philosophy, it is through ignorance that the soul has been 
joined with nature. The aim is to get rid of nature's control over us. That is 
the goal of all religions. Each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to 
manifest this Divinity within, by controlling nature, external and internal. 
Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy -- by 
one or more or all of these -- and be free. This is the whole of religion. 
Doctrines, or dogmas, or rituals, or books, or temples, or forms, are but 
secondary details. The Yogi tries to reach this  goal through psychic control. 
Until we can free ourselves from nature, we are slaves; as she dictates so we 
must go. The Yogi claims that he who controls mind controls matter also. 
The internal nature is much higher than the external and much more difficult 
to grapple with, much more difficult to control. Therefore he who has 
conquered the internal nature controls the whole universe;  it becomes his 
servant. Raja - yoga propounds the methods of gaining this control. Forces 
higher than we know in physical nature will have to be subdued.  This body 
is just the external crust of the mind. They are not two different things; they 
are just as the oyster and its shell. They are but two aspects of one thing; the 

114

Raja Yoga

internal substance of the oyster takes up matter from outside, and 
manufactures the shell. In the same way the internal fine forces which are 
called mind take up gross matter from outside, and from that manufacture 
this external shell, the body.

If, then, we have control of the internal, it is very easy to have control of the 
external. Then again, these forces are not different. It is not that some forces 
are physical, and some mental; the physical forces are but the gross 
manifestations of the fine forces, just as the physical world is but the gross 
manifestation of the fine world. 

26. The means of destruction of ignorance is unbroken practice of 
discrimination.

This is the real goal of practice -- discrimination between the real and the 
unreal, knowing that the Purusha is not nature, that it is neither matter nor 
mind, and that because it is not nature, it cannot possibly change. It is only 
nature which changes, combining and re - combining, dissolving 
continually. When through constant practice we begin to discriminate, 
ignorance will vanish, and the Purusha will begin to shine in its real nature -- 
omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent. 

27. His knowledge is of the sevenfold highest ground.

When this knowledge comes, it will come, as it were, in seven grades, one 
after the other; and when one of these begins, we know that we are getting 
knowledge. The first to appear will be that we have known what is to be 
known. The mind will cease to be dissatisfied. While we are aware of 
thirsting after knowledge, we begin to seek here and there, wherever we 
think we can get some truth, and failing to find it we become dissatisfied and 
seek in a fresh direction. All search is vain, until we begin to perceive that 
knowledge is within ourselves, that no one can help us, that we must help 
ourselves. When we begin to practise the power of discrimination, the first 
sign that we are getting near truth will be that that dissatisfied state will 
vanish. We shall feel quite sure that we have found the truth, and that it 
cannot be anything else but the truth. Then we may know that the sun is 
rising, that the morning is breaking for us, and taking courage, we must 

115

Raja Yoga

persevere until the goal is reached. The second grade will be the absence of 
all pains. It will be impossible for anything in the universe, external or 
internal, to give us pain. The third will be the attainment of full knowledge. 
Omniscience will be ours. The fourth will be the attainment of the end of all 
duty through discrimination. Next will come what is called freedom of the 
Chitta. We shall realise that all difficulties and struggles, all vacillations of 
the mind, have fallen down, just as a stone rolls from the mountain top into 
the valley and never comes up again. The next will be that the Chitta itself 
will realise that it melts away into its causes whenever we so desire. Lastly 
we shall find that we are established in our Self, that we have been alone 
throughout the universe, neither body nor mind was ever related, much less 
joined, to us. They were working their own way, and we, through ignorance, 
joined ourselves to them. But we have been alone, omnipotent, omnipresent, 
ever blessed; our own Self was so pure and perfect that we required none 
else. We required none else to make us happy, for we are happiness itself. 
We shall find that this knowledge does not depend on anything else; 
throughout the universe there can be nothing that will not become effulgent 
before our knowledge. This will be the last state, and the Yogi will become 
peaceful and calm, never to feel any more pain, never to be again deluded, 
never to be touched by misery. He will know he is ever blessed, ever perfect, 
almighty. 

28. By the practice of the different parts of Yogas the impurities being 
destroyed, knowledge becomes effulgent up to discrimination.

Now comes the practical knowledge. What we have just been speaking 
about is much higher. It is away above our heads, but it is the ideal. It is first 
necessary to obtain physical and mental control. Then the realisation will 
become steady in that ideal. The ideal being known, what remains is to 
practise the method of reaching it. 

29. Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, 
and Samadhi are the eight limbs of Yoga.

30. Non - killing, truthfulness, non - stealing, continence, and non - 
receiving are called Yamas.

116

Raja Yoga

A man who wants to be a perfect Yogi must give up the sex idea. The soul 
has no sex; why should it degrade itself with sex ideas? Later on we shall 
understand better why these ideas must be given up. The mind of the man 
who receives gifts is acted on by the mind of the giver, so the receiver is 
likely to become degenerated. Receiving gifts is prone to destroy the 
independence of the mind, and make us slavish. Therefore, receive no gifts. 

31. These, unbroken by time, place, purpose, and caste - rules, are 
(universal) great vows.

These practices -- non - killing, truthfulness, non - stealing, chastity, and non 
- receiving -- are to be practised by every man, woman, and child; by every 
soul, irrespective of nation, country, or position. 

32. Internal and external purification, contentment, mortification, 
study, and worship of God are the Niyamas.

External purification is keeping the body pure; a dirty man will never be a 
Yogi. There must be internal purification also. That is obtained by the 
virtues named in I.33. Of course, internal purity is of greater value than 
external, but both are necessary, and external purity, without internal, is of 
no good. 

33. To obstruct thoughts which are inimical to Yoga, contrary thoughts 
should be brought.

That is the way to practise the virtues that have been stated. For instance, 
when a big wave of anger has come into the mind, how are we to control 
that? Just by raising an opposing wave. Think of love. Sometimes a mother 
is very angry with her husband, and while in that state, the baby comes in, 
and she kisses the baby; the old wave dies out and a new wave arises, love 
for the child. That suppresses the other one. Love is opposite to anger. 
Similarly, when the idea of stealing comes, non - stealing should be thought 
of; when the idea of receiving gifts comes, replace it by a contrary thought. 

34. The obstructions to Yoga are killing, falsehood, etc., whether 
committed, caused, or approved; either through avarice, or anger, or 

117

Raja Yoga

ignorance; whether slight, middling, or great; and they result in infinite 
ignorance and misery. This is (the method of) thinking the contrary.

If I tell a lie, or cause another to tell one, or approve of another doing so, it is 
equally sinful. If it is a very mild lie, still it is a lie. Every vicious thought 
will rebound, every thought of hatred which you may have thought, in a cave 
even, is stored up, and will one day come back to you with tremendous 
power in the form of some misery here. If you project hatred and jealousy, 
they will rebound on you with compound interest. No power can avert them; 
when once you have put them in motion, you will have to bear them. 
Remembering this will prevent you from doing wicked things. 

35. Non - killing being established, in his presence all enmities cease (in 
others).

If a man gets the ideal of non - injuring others, before him even animals 
which are by their nature ferocious will become peaceful. The tiger and the 
lamb will play together before that Yogi. When you have come to that state, 
then alone you will understand that you have become firmly established in 
non - injuring.

36. By the establishment of truthfulness the Yogi gets the power of 
attaining for himself and others the fruits of work without the works.

When this power of truth will be established with you, then even in dream 
you will never tell an untruth. You will be true in thought, word, and deed. 
Whatever you say will be truth. You may say to a man, "Be blessed," and 
that man will be blessed. If a man is diseased, and you say to him, "Be thou 
cured," he will be cured immediately. 

37. By the establishment of non - stealing all wealth comes to the Yogi.

The more you fly from nature, the more she follows you; and if you do not 
care for her at all, she becomes your slave. 

38. By the establishment of continence energy is gained.

118

Raja Yoga

The chaste brain has tremendous energy and gigantic will - power. Without 
chastity there can be no spiritual strength. Continence  gives wonderful 
control over mankind. The spiritual leaders of men have been very continent, 
and this is what gave them power. Therefore the Yogi must be continent. 

39. When he is fixed in non - receiving, he gets the memory of past life.

When a man does not receive presents, he does not become beholden to 
others, but remains independent and free. His mind becomes pure. With 
every gift, he is likely to receive the evils of the giver. If he does not receive, 
the mind is purified, and the first power it gets is memory of past life. Then 
alone the Yogi becomes perfectly fixed in his ideal. He sees that he has been 
coming and going many times, so he becomes determined that this time he 
will be free, that he will no more come and go, and be the slave of Nature. 

40. Internal and external cleanliness being established, there arises 
disgust for one's own body, and non - intercourse with others.

When there is real purification of the body, external and internal, there arises 
neglect of the body, and the idea of keeping it nice vanishes. A face which 
others call most beautiful will appear to the Yogi as merely animal, if there 
is not intelligence behind it. What the world calls a very common face he 
regards as heavenly, if the spirit shines behind it. This thirst after body is the 
great bane of human life. So the first sign of the establishment of purity is 
that you do not care to think you are a body. It is only when purity comes 
that we get rid of the body idea. 

41. There also arises purification of the Sattva, cheerfulness of the mind, 
concentration, conquest of the organs, and fitness for the realisation of 
the Self.

By the practice of cleanliness, the Sattva material prevails, and the mind 
becomes concentrated and cheerful. The first sign that you are becoming 
religious is that you are becoming cheerful. When a man is gloomy, that 
may be dyspepsia, but it is not religion. A pleasurable feeling is the nature of 
the Sattva. Everything is pleasurable to the Sattvika man, and when this 
comes, know that you are progressing in Yoga. All pain is caused by Tamas, 

119

Raja Yoga

so you must get rid of that; moroseness is one of the results of Tamas. The 
strong, the well - knit, the young, the healthy, the daring alone are fit to be 
Yogis. To the Yogi everything is bliss, every human face that he sees brings 
cheerfulness to him. That is the sign of a virtuous man. Misery is caused by 
sin, and by no other cause. What business have you with clouded faces? It is 
terrible. If you have a clouded face, do not go out that day, shut yourself up 
in your room. What right have you to carry this disease out into the world? 
When your mind has become controlled, you have control over the whole 
body; instead of being a slave to this machine, the machine is your slave. 
Instead of this machine being able to drag the soul down, it becomes it 
greatest helpmate. 

42. From contentment comes superlative happiness.

43. The result of mortification is bringing powers to the organs and 
body, by destroying the impurity.

The results of mortification are seen immediately, sometimes by heightened 
powers of vision, hearing things at a distance, and so on. 

44. By repetition of the Mantra comes the realisation of the intended 
deity.

The higher the beings that you want to get the harder is the practice. 

45. By sacrificing all the Ishvara comes Samadhi.

By resignation to the Lord, Samadhi becomes perfect.

46. Posture is that which is firm and pleasant.

Now comes Asana, posture. Until you can get a firm seat you cannot practise 
the breathing and other exercises. Firmness of seat means that you do not 
feel the body at all. In the ordinary way, you will find that as soon as you sit 
for a few minutes all sorts of disturbances come into the body; but when you 
have got beyond the idea of a concrete body, you will lose all sense of the 

120

Raja Yoga

body. You will feel neither pleasure nor pain. And when you take your body 
up again, it will feel so rested. It is the only perfect rest that you can give to 
the body. When you have succeeded in conquering the body and keeping it 
firm, your practice will remain firm, but while you are disturbed by the 
body, your nerves become disturbed, and you cannot concentrate the mind. 

47. By lessening the natural tendency (for restlessness) and meditating 
on the unlimited, posture becomes firm and pleasant.

We can make the seat firm by thinking of the infinite. We cannot think of 
the Absolute Infinite, but we can think of the infinite sky. 

48. Seat being conquered, the dualities do not obstruct.

The dualities, good and bad, heat and cold, and all the pairs of opposites, 
will not then disturb you. 

49. Controlling the motion of the exhalation and the inhalation follows 
after this.

When posture has been conquered, then the motion of the Prana is to be 
broken and controlled. Thus we come to Pranayama, the controlling of the 
vital forces of the body. Prana is not breath, though it is usually so 
translated. It is the sum total of the cosmic energy. It is the energy that is in 
each body, and its most apparent manifestation is the motion of the lungs. 
This motion is caused by Prana drawing in the breath, and it is what we seek 
to control in Pranayama. We begin by controlling the breath, as the easiest 
way of getting control of the Prana. 

50. Its modifications are either external or internal, or motionless, 
regulated by place, time, and number, either long or short.

The three sorts of motion of Pranayama are, one by which we draw the 
breath in, another by which we throw it out, and the third action is when the 
breath is held in the lungs, or stopped from entering the lungs. These, again, 
are varied by place and time. By place is meant that the Prana is held to 
some particular part of the body. By time is meant how long the Prana 

121

Raja Yoga

should be confined to a certain place, and so we are told how many seconds 
to keep one motion, and how many seconds to keep another. The result of 
this Pranayama is Udghata, awakening the Kundalini. 

51. The fourth is restraining the Prana by reflecting on external or 
internal object.

This is the fourth sort of Pranayama, in which the Kumbhaka is brought 
about by long practice attended with reflection, which is absent in the other 
three. 

52. From that, the covering to the light of the Chitta is attenuated.

The Chitta has, by its own nature, all knowledge. It is made of Sattva 
particles, but is covered by Rajas and Tamas particles, and by Pranayama 
this covering is removed. 

53. The mind becomes fit for Dharana.

After this covering has been removed, we are able to concentrate the mind. 

54. The drawing in of the organs is by their giving up their own objects 
and taking the form of the mind - stuff, as it were.

The organs are separate states of the mind - stuff. I see a book; the form is 
not in the book, it is in the mind. Something is outside which calls that form 
up. The real form is in the Chitta. The organs identify themselves with, and 
take the form of, whatever comes to them. If you can restrain the mind - 
stuff from taking these forms, the mind will remain calm. This is called 
Pratyahara. 

55. Thence arises supreme control of the organs.

When the Yogi has succeeded in preventing the organs from taking the 
forms of external objects, and in making them remain one with the mind - 
stuff, then comes perfect control of the organs. When the organs are 
perfectly under control, every muscle and nerve will be under control, 
because the organs are the centres of all the sensations, and of all actions. 

122

Raja Yoga

These organs are divided into organs of work and organs of sensation. When 
the organs are controlled, the Yogi can control all feeling and doing; the 
whole of the body comes under his control. Then alone one begins to feel 
joy in being born; then one can truthfully say, "Blessed am I that I was 
born." When that control of the organs is obtained, we feel how wonderful 
this body really is.

123

Raja Yoga

Powers

We have now come to the chapter in which the Yoga powers are described. 

1. Dharana is holding the mind on to some particular object.

Dharana (concentration) is when the mind holds on to some object, either in 
the body, or outside the body, and keeps itself in that state. 

2. An unbroken flow of knowledge in that object is Dhyana.

The mind tries to think of one object, to hold itself to one particular spot, as 
the top of the head, the heart, etc., and if the mind succeeds in receiving the 
sensations only through that part of the body, and through no other part, that 
would be Dharana, and when the mind succeeds in keeping itself in that state 
for some time, it is called Dhyana (meditation). 

3. When that, giving up all forms, reflects only the meaning, it is 
Samadhi.

That comes when in meditation the form or the external part is given up. 
Suppose I were meditating on a book, and that I have gradually succeeded in 
concentrating the mind on it, and perceiving only the internal sensations, the 
meaning, unexpressed in any form -- that state of Dhyana is called Samadhi. 

4. (These) three (when practised) in regard to one object is Samyama.

When a man can direct his mind to any particular object and fix it there, and 
then keep it there for a long time, separating the object from the internal 
part, this is Samyama; or Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi, one following the 
other, and making one. The form of the thing has vanished, and only its 
meaning remains in the mind. 

5. By the conquest of that comes light of knowledge.

124

Raja Yoga

When one has succeeded in making this Samyama, all powers come under 
his control. This is the great instrument of the Yogi. The objects of 
knowledge are infinite, and they are divided into the gross, grosser, grossest 
and the fine, finer, finest and so on. This Samyama should be first applied to 
gross things, and when you begin to get knowledge of this gross, slowly, by 
stages, it should be brought to finer things. 

6. That should be employed in stages.

This is a note of warning not to attempt to go too fast.

7. These three are more internal than those that precede.

Before these we had the Pratyahara, the Pranayama, the Asana, the Yama 
and Niyama; they are external parts of the three -- Dharana, Dhyana and 
Samadhi. When a man has attained to them, he may attain to omniscience 
and omnipotence, but that would not be salvation. These three would not 
make the mind Nirvikalpa, changeless, but would leave the seeds for getting 
bodies again. Only when the seeds are, as the Yogi says, "fried," do they 
lose the possibility of producing further plants. These powers cannot fry the 
seed. 

8. But even they are external to the seedless (Samadhi).

Compared with that seedless Samadhi, therefore, even these are external. We 
have not yet reached the real Samadhi, the highest, but a lower stage, in 
which this universe still exists as we see it, and in which are all these 
powers. 

9. By the suppression of the disturbed impressions of the mind, and by 
the rise of impressions of control, the mind, which persists in that 
moment of control, is said to attain the controlling modifications.

That is to say, in this first state of Samadhi the modifications of the mind 
have been controlled, but not perfectly, because if they were, there would be 
no modifications. If there is a modification which impels the mind to rush 

125

Raja Yoga

out through the senses, and the Yogi tries to control it, that very control itself 
will be a modification. One wave will be checked by another wave, so it will 
not be real Samadhi in which all the waves subside, as control itself will be a 
wave. Yet this lower Samadhi is very much nearer to the higher Samadhi 
than when the mind comes bubbling out. 

10. Its flow becomes steady by habit.

The flow of this continuous control of the mind becomes steady when 
practised day after day, and the mind obtains the faculty of constant 
concentration. 

11. Taking in all sorts of objects, and concentrating upon one object, 
these two powers being destroyed and manifested respectively, the 
Chitta gets the modification called Samadhi.

The mind takes up various objects, runs into all sorts of things. That is the 
lower state. There is a higher state of the mind, when it takes up one object 
and excludes all others, of which Samadhi is the result. 

12. The one - pointedness of the Chitta is when the impression that is 
past and that which is present are similar.

How are we to know that the mind has become concentrated? Because the 
idea of time will vanish. The more time passes unnoticed the more 
concentrated we are. In common life we see that when we are interested in a 
book we do not note the time at all; and when we leave the book, we are 
often surprised to find how many hours have passed. All time will have the 
tendency to come and stand in the one present. So the definition is given: 
When the past and present come and stand in one, the mind is said to be 
concentrated.

13. By this is explained the threefold transformation of form, time and 
state, in fine or gross matter and in the organs.

By the threefold changes in the mind - stuff as to form, time and state are 
explained the corresponding changes in gross and subtle matter and in the 

126

Raja Yoga

organs. Suppose there is a lump of gold. It is transformed into a bracelet and 
again into an earring. These are changes as to form. The same phenomena 
looked at from the standpoint of time give us change as to time. Again, the 
bracelet or the earring may be bright or dull, thick or thin, and so on. This is 
change as to state. Now referring to the aphorisms 9, 11 and 12, the mind - 
stuff is changing into Vrittis -- this is change as to form. That it passes 
through past, present and future moments of time is change as to time. That 
the impressions vary as to intensity within one particular period, say, 
present, is change as to state. The concentrations taught in the preceding 
aphorisms were to give the Yogi a voluntary control over the 
transformations of his mind - stuff, which alone will enable him to make the 
Samyama named in III.4. 

14. That which is acted upon by transformation, either past, present, or 
yet to be manifested is the qualified.

That is to say, the qualified is the substance which is being acted upon by 
time and by the Samskaras, and getting changed and being manifested 
always.

15. The succession of changes is the cause of manifold evolution.

16. By making Samyama on the three sorts of changes comes the 
knowledge of past and future.

We must not lose sight of the first definition of Samyama. When the mind 
has attained to that state when it identifies itself with the internal impression 
of the object, leaving the external, and when, by long practice, that is 
retained by the mind and the mind can get into that state in a moment, that is 
Samyama. If a man in that state wants to know the past and future, he has to 
make a Samyama on the changes in the Samskaras (III.13). Some are 
working now at present, some have worked out, and some are waiting to 
work. So by making a Samyama on these he knows the past and future.

17. By making Samyama on word, meaning and knowledge, which are 
ordinarily confused, comes the knowledge of all animal sounds.

127

Raja Yoga

The word represents the external cause, the meaning represents the internal 
vibration that travels to the brain through the channels of the Indriyas, 
conveying the external impression to the mind, and knowledge represents 
the reaction of the mind, with which comes perception. These three, 
confused, make our sense - objects. Suppose I hear a word; there is first the 
external vibration, next the internal sensation carried to the mind by the 
organ of hearing, then the mind reacts, and I know the word. The word I 
know is a mixture of the three -- vibration, sensation, and reaction. 
Ordinarily these three are inseparable; but by practice the Yogi can separate 
them. When a man has attained to this, if he makes a Samyama on any 
sound, he understands the meaning which that sound was intended to 
express, whether it was made by man or by any other animal. 

18. By perceiving the impressions, (comes) the knowledge of past life.

Each experience that we have, comes in the form of a wave in the Chitta, 
and this subsides and becomes finer and finer, but is never lost. It remains 
there in minute form, and if we can bring this wave up again, it becomes 
memory. So, if the Yogi can make a Samyama on these past impressions in 
the mind, he will begin to remember all his past lives. 

19. By making Samyama on the signs in another's body, knowledge of 
his mind comes.

Each man has particular signs on his body, which differentiate him from 
others; when the Yogi makes a Samyama on these signs he knows the nature 
of the mind of that person. 

20. But not its contents, that not being the object of the Samyama.

He would not know the contents of the mind by making a Samyama on the 
body. There would be required a twofold Samyama, first on the signs in the 
body, and then on the mind itself. The Yogi would then know everything 
that is in that mind. 

128

Raja Yoga

21. By making Samyama on the form of the body, the perceptibility of 
the form being obstructed and the power of manifestation in the eye 
being separated, the Yogi's body becomes unseen.

A Yogi standing in the midst of this room can apparently vanish. He does 
not really vanish, but he will not be seen by anyone. The form and the body 
are, as it were, separated. You must remember that this can only be done 
when the Yogi has attained to that power of concentration when form and 
the thing formed have been separated. Then he makes a Samyama on that, 
and the power to perceive forms is obstructed, because the power of 
perceiving forms comes from the junction of form and the thing formed. 

22. By this the disappearance or concealment of words which are being 
spoken and such other things are also explained. 

23. Karma is of two kinds -- soon to be fructified and late to be 
fructified. By making Samyama on these, or by the signs called Arishta, 
portents, the Yogis know the exact time of separation from their bodies.

When a Yogi makes a Samyama on his own Karma, upon those impressions 
in his mind which are now working, and those which are just waiting to 
work, he knows exactly by those that are waiting when his body will fall. He 
knows when he will die, at what hour, even at what minute. The Hindus 
think very much of that knowledge or consciousness of the nearness of 
death, because it is taught in the Gita that the thoughts at the moment of 
departure are great powers in determining the next life. 

24. By making Samyama on friendship, mercy, etc. (I.33), the Yogi 
excels in the respective qualities. 

25. By making Samyama on the strength of the elephant and others, 
their respective strength comes to the Yogi.

When a Yogi has attained to this Samyama and wants strength, he makes a 
Samyama on the strength of the elephant and gets it. Infinite energy is at the 
disposal of everyone if he only knows how to get it. The Yogi has 
discovered the science of getting it. 

129

Raja Yoga

26. By making Samyama on the Effulgent Light (I.36), comes the 
knowledge of the fine, the obstructed, and the remote.

When the Yogi makes Samyama on that Effulgent

Light in the heart, he sees things which are very remote, things, for instance, 
that are happening in a distant place, and which are obstructed by mountain 
barriers, and also things which are very fine. 

27. By making Samyama on the sun, (comes) the knowledge of the 
world. 

28. On the moon, (comes) the knowledge of the cluster of stars. 

29. On the pole - star, (comes) the knowledge of the motions of the stars. 

30. On the navel circle, (comes) the knowledge of the constitution of the 
body. 

31. On the hollow of the throat, (comes) cessation of hunger.

When a man is very hungry, if he can make Samyama on the hollow of the 
throat, hunger ceases.

32. On the nerve called Kurma, (comes) fixity of the body.

When he is practising, the body is not disturbed.

33. On the light emanating from the top of the head, sight of the 
Siddhas.

The Siddhas are beings who are a little above ghosts. When the Yogi 
concentrates his mind on the top of his head, he will see these Siddhas. The 
word Siddha does not refer to those men who have become free -- a sense in 
which it is often used. 

34. Or by the power of Pratibha, all knowledge.

130

Raja Yoga

All these can come without any Samyama to the man who has the power of 
Pratibha (spontaneous enlightenment from purity). When a man has risen to 
a high state of Pratibha, he has that great light. All things are apparent to 
him. Everything comes to him naturally without making Samyama. 

35. In the heart, knowledge of minds.

36. Enjoyment comes from the non - discrimination of the soul and 
Sattva which are totally different because the latter's actions are for 
another. Samyama on the self - centred one gives knowledge of the 
Purusha.

All action of Sattva, a modification of Prakriti characterised by light and 
happiness, is for the soul. When Sattva is free from egoism and illuminated 
with the pure intelligence of Purusha, it is called the self - centred one, 
because in that state it becomes independent of all relations. 

37. From that arises the knowledge belonging to Pratibha and 
(supernatural) hearing, touching, seeing, tasting and smelling.

38. These are obstacles to Samadhi; but they are powers in the worldly 
state.

To the Yogi knowledge of the enjoyments of the world comes by the 
junction of the Purusha and the mind. If he wants to make Samyama on the 
knowledge that they are two different things, nature and soul, he gets 
knowledge of the Purusha. From that arises discrimination. When he has got 
that discrimination, he gets the Pratibha, the light of supreme genius. These 
powers, however, are obstructions to the attainment of the highest goal, the 
knowledge of the pure Self, and freedom. These are, as it were, to be met in 
the way; and if the Yogi rejects them, he attains the highest. If he is tempted 
to acquire these, his further progress is barred. 

39. When the cause of bondage of the Chitta has become loosened, the 
Yogi, by his knowledge of its channels of activity (the nerves), enters 
another's body.

131

Raja Yoga

The Yogi can enter a dead body and make it get up and move, even while he 
himself is working in another body. Or he can enter a living body and hold 
that man's mind and organs in check, and for the time being act through the 
body of that man. That is done by the Yogi coming to this discrimination of 
Purusha and nature. If he wants to enter another's body, he makes a 
Samyama on that body and enters it, because, not only is his soul 
omnipresent, but his mind also, as the Yogi teaches. It is one bit of the 
universal mind. Now, however, it can only work through the nerve currents 
in this body, but when the Yogi has loosened himself from these nerve 
currents, he can work through other things. 

40. By conquering the current called Udana the Yogi does not sink in 
water or in swamps, he can walk on thorns etc., and can die at will.

Udana is the name of the nerve current that governs the lungs and all the 
upper parts of the body, and when he is master of it, he becomes light in 
weight. He does not sink in water; he can walk on thorns and sword blades, 
and stand in fire, and can depart this life when ever he likes. 

41. By the conquest of the current Samana he is surrounded by a blaze 
of light.

Whenever he likes, light flashes from his body.

42. By making Samyama on the relation between the ear and the 
Akasha comes divine hearing.

There is the Akasha, the ether, and the instrument, the ear. By making 
Samyama on them the Yogi gets supernormal hearing; he hears everything. 
Anything spoken or sounded miles away he can hear. 

43. By making Samyama on the relation between the Akasha and the 
body and becoming light as cotton - wool etc., through meditation on 
them, the Yogi goes through the skies.

132

Raja Yoga

This Akasha is the material of this body; it is only Akasha in a certain form 
that has become the body. If the Yogi makes a Samyama on this Akasha 
material of his body, it acquires the lightness of Akasha, and he can go 
anywhere through the air. So in the other case also. 

44. By making Samyama on the "real modifications" of the mind, 
outside of the body, called great disembodiedness, comes disappearance 
of the covering to light.

The mind in its foolishness thinks that it is working in this body. Why 
should I be bound by one system of nerves, and put the Ego only in one 
body, if the mind is omnipresent? There is no reason  why I should. The Yogi 
wants to feel the Ego wherever he likes. The mental waves which arise in the 
absence of egoism in the body are called "real modifications" or "great 
disembodiedness". When he has succeeded in making Samyama on these 
modifications, all covering to light goes away, and all darkness and 
ignorance vanish. Everything appears to him to be full of knowledge. 

45. By making Samyama on the gross and fine forms of the elements, 
their essential traits, the inherence of the Gunas in them and on their 
contributing to the experience of the soul, comes mastery of the 
elements.

The Yogi makes Samyama on the elements, first on the gross, and then on 
the finer states. This Samyama is taken up more by a sect of the Buddhists. 
They take a lump of clay and make Samyama on that, and gradually they 
begin to see the fine materials of which it is composed, and when they have 
known all the fine materials in it, they get power over that element. So with 
all the elements. The Yogi can conquer them all. 

46. From that comes minuteness and the rest of the powers, 
"glorification of the body," and indestructibleness of the bodily 
qualities.

This means that the Yogi has attained the eight powers. He can make 
himself as minute as a particle, or as huge as a mountain, as heavy as the 
earth, or as light as the air; he can reach anything he likes, he can rule 

133

Raja Yoga

everything he wants, he can conquer everything he wants, and so on. A lion 
will sit at his feet like a lamb, and all his desires will be fulfilled at will. 

47. The "glorification of the body" is beauty, complexion, strength, 
adamantine hardness.

The body becomes indestructible. Nothing can injure it. Nothing can destroy 
it until the Yogi wishes. "Breaking the rod of time he lives in this universe 
with his body." In the Vedas it is written that for that man there is no more 
disease, death or pain. 

48. By making Samyama on the objectivity and power of illumination of 
the organs, on egoism, the inherence of the Gunas in them and on their 
contributing to the experience of the soul, comes the conquest of the 
organs.

In the perception of external objects the organs leave their place in the mind 
and go towards the object; this is followed by knowledge. Egoism also is 
present in the act. When the Yogi makes Samyama on these and the other 
two by gradation, he conquers the organs. Take up anything that you see or 
feel, a book for instance; first concentrate the mind on it, then on the 
knowledge that is in the form of a book, and then on the Ego that sees the 
book, and so on. By that practice all the  organs will be conquered. 

49. From that comes to the body the power of rapid movement like the 
mind, power of the organs independently of the body, and conquest of 
nature.

Just as by the conquest of the elements comes glorified body, so from the 
conquest of the organs will come the above - mentioned powers. 

50. By making Samyama on the discrimination between the Sattva and 
the Purusha come omnipotence and omniscience.

When nature has been conquered, and the difference between the Purusha 
and nature realised -- that the Purusha is indestructible, pure and perfect -- 
then come omnipotence and omniscience. 

134

Raja Yoga

51. By giving up even these powers comes the destruction of the very 
seed of evil, which leads to Kaivalya.

He attains aloneness, independence, and becomes free. When one gives up 
even the ideas of omnipotence and omniscience, there comes entire rejection 
of enjoyment, of the temptations from celestial beings. When the Yogi has 
seen all these wonderful powers, and rejected them, he reaches the goal. 
What are all these powers? Simply manifestations. They are no better than 
dreams. Even omnipotence is a dream. It depends on the mind. So long as 
there is a mind it can be understood, but the goal is beyond even the mind. 

52. The Yogi should not feel allured or flattered by the overtures of 
celestial beings for fear of evil again.

There are other dangers too; gods and other beings come to tempt the Yogi. 
They do not want anyone to be perfectly free. They are jealous, just as we 
are, and worse than us sometimes. They are very much afraid of losing their 
places. Those Yogis who do not reach perfection die and become gods; 
leaving the direct road they go into one of the side streets, and get these 
powers. Then, again, they have to be born. But he who is strong enough to 
withstand these temptations and go straight to the goal, becomes free. 

53. By making Samyama on a particle of time and its precession and 
succession comes discrimination.

How are we to avoid all these things, these Devas, and heavens, and powers? 
By discrimination, by knowing good from evil. Therefore a Samyama is 
given by which the power of discrimination can be strengthened.

This is by making a Samyama on a particle of time, and the time preceding 
and following it. 

54. Those things which cannot be differentiated by species, sign, and 
place, even they will be discriminated by the above Samyama.

The misery that we suffer comes from ignorance, from non - discrimination 
between the real and the unreal. We all take the bad for the good, the dream 

135

Raja Yoga

for the reality. Soul is the only reality, and we have forgotten it. Body is an 
unreal dream, and we think we are all bodies. This non - discrimination is 
the cause of misery. It is caused by ignorance. When discrimination comes, 
it brings strength, and then alone can we avoid all these various ideas of 
body, heavens, and gods. This ignorance arises through differentiating by 
species, sign, and place. For instance, take a cow. The cow is differentiated 
from the dog by species. Even with the cows alone how do we make the 
distinction between one cow and another? By signs. If two objects are 
exactly similar, they can be distinguished if they are in different places. 
When objects are so mixed up that even these differentiae will not help us, 
the power of discrimination acquired by the above - mentioned practice will 
give us the ability to distinguish them. The highest philosophy of the Yogi is 
based upon this fact, that the Purusha is pure and perfect, and is the only 
"simple" that exists in this universe. The body and mind are compounds, and 
yet we are ever identifying ourselves with them. This is the great mistake 
that the distinction has been lost. When this power of discrimination has 
been attained, man sees that everything in this world, mental and physical, is 
a compound, and, as such, cannot be the Purusha. 

55. The saving knowledge is that knowledge of discrimination which 
simultaneously covers all objects, in all their variations.

Saving, because the knowledge takes the Yogi across the ocean of birth and 
death. The whole of Prakriti in all its states, subtle and gross, is within the 
grasp of this knowledge. There is no succession in perception by this 
knowledge; it takes in all things simultaneously, at a glance. 

56. By the similarity of purity between the Sattva and the Purusha 
comes Kaivalya.

When the soul realises that it depends on nothing in the universe, from gods 
to the lowest atom, that is called Kaivalya (isolation) and perfection. It is 
attained when this mixture of purity and impurity called Sattva (intellect)  
has been made as pure as the Purusha itself; then the Sattva reflects only the 
unqualified essence of purity, which is the Purusha.

References

136

Raja Yoga

1. The distinction among the three kinds of concentration mentioned in 
aphorisms 9, 11 and 12 is as follows: In the first, the disturbed 
impressions are merely held back, but not altogether obliterated by the 
impressions of control which just come in; in the second, the former 
are completely suppressed by the latter which stand in bold relief; 
while in the third, which is the highest, there is no question of 
suppressing, but only similar impressions succeed each other in a 
stream.--Ed.

137

Raja Yoga

Independence

1. The Siddhis (powers) are attained by birth, chemical means, power of 
words, mortification, or concentration.

Sometimes a man is born with the Siddhis, powers, of course, those he had 
earned in his previous incarnation. This time he is born, as it were, to enjoy 
the fruits of them. It is said of Kapila, the great father of the Sankhya 
philosophy, that he was a born Siddha, which means literally a man who has 
attained to success.

The Yogis claim that these powers can be gained by chemical means. All of 
you know that chemistry originally began as alchemy; men went in search of 
the philosopher's stone and elixirs of life, and so forth. In India there was a 
sect called the Rasayanas. Their idea was that ideality, knowledge, 
spirituality, and religion were all very right, but that the body was the only 
instrument by which to attain to all these. If the body came to an end every 
now and again, it would take so much more time to attain to the goal. For 
instance, a man wants to practise Yoga, or wants to become spiritual. Before 
he has advanced very far he dies. Then he takes another body and begins 
again, then dies, and so on. In this way much time will be lost in dying and 
being born again. If the body could be made strong and perfect, so that it 
would get rid of birth and death, we should have so much more time to 
become spiritual. So these Rasayanas say, first make the body very strong. 
They claim that this body can be made immortal. Their idea is that if the 
mind manufactures the body, and if it be true that each mind is only one 
outlet to the infinite energy, there should be no limit to each outlet getting 
any amount of power from outside. Why is it impossible to keep our bodies 
all the time? We have to manufacture all the bodies that we ever have. As 
soon as this body dies, we shall have to manufacture another. If we can do 
that, why cannot we do it just here and now, without getting out of the 
present body? The theory is perfectly correct. If it is possible that we live 
after death, and make other bodies, why is it impossible that we should have 
the power of making bodies here, without entirely dissolving this body, 
simply changing it continually? They also thought that in mercury and in 

138

Raja Yoga

sulphur was hidden the most wonderful power, and that by certain 
preparations of these a man could keep the body as long as he liked. Others 
believed that certain drugs could bring powers, such as flying through the 
air. Many of the most wonderful medicines of the present day we owe to the 
Rasayanas, notably the use of metals in medicine. Certain sects of Yogis 
claim that many of their principal teachers are still living in their old bodies. 
Patanjali, the great authority on Yoga, does not deny this.

The power of words. There are certain sacred words called Mantras, which 
have power, when repeated under proper conditions, to produce these 
extraordinary powers. We are living in the midst of such a mass of miracles, 
day and night, that we do not think anything of them. There is no limit to 
man's power, the power of words and the power of mind.

Mortification. You find that in every religion mortifications and asceticisms 
have been practised. In these religious conceptions the Hindus always go to 
the extremes. You will find men with their hands up all their lives, until their 
hands wither and die. Men keep standing, day and night, until their feet 
swell, and if they live, the legs become so stiff in this position that they can 
no more bend them, but have to stand all their lives. I once saw a man who 
had kept his hands raised in this way, and I asked him how it felt when he 
did it first. He said it was awful torture. It was such torture that he had to go 
to a river and put himself in water, and that allayed the pain for a little while. 
After a month he did not suffer much. Through such practices powers 
(Siddhis) can be attained.

Concentration. Concentration is Samadhi, and that is Yoga proper; that is the 
principal theme of this science, and it is the highest means. The preceding 
ones are only secondary, and we cannot attain to the highest through them. 
Samadhi is the means through which we can gain anything and everything, 
mental, moral, or spiritual. 

2. The change into another species is by the filling in of nature.

Patanjali has advanced the proposition that these powers come by birth, 
sometimes by chemical means, or through mortification. He also admits that 
this body can be kept for any length of time. Now he goes on to state what is 

139

Raja Yoga

the cause of the change of the body into another species. He says this is done 
by the filling in of nature, which he explains in the next aphorism. 

3. Good and bad deeds are not the direct causes in the transformations 
of nature, but they act as breakers of obstacles to the evolutions of 
nature: as a farmer breaks the obstacles to the course of water, which 
then runs down by its own nature.

The water for irrigation of fields is already in the canal, only shut in by 
gates. The farmer opens these gates, and the water flows in by itself, by the 
law of gravitation. So all progress and power are already in every man; 
perfection is man's nature, only it is barred in and prevented from taking its 
proper course. If anyone can take the bar off, in rushes nature. Then the man 
attains the powers which are his already. Those we call wicked become 
saints, as soon as the bar is broken and nature rushes in. It is nature that is 
driving us towards perfection, and eventually she will bring everyone there. 
All these practices and struggles to become religious are only negative work, 
to take off the bars, and open the doors to that perfection which is our 
birthright, our nature.

140

Raja Yoga

Today the evolution theory of the ancient Yogis will be better understood in 
the light of modern research. And yet the theory of the Yogis is a better 
explanation. The two causes of evolution advanced by the moderns, viz. 
sexual selection and survival of the fittest, are inadequate. Suppose human 
knowledge to have advanced so much as to eliminate competition, both from 
the function of acquiring physical sustenance and of acquiring a mate. Then, 
according to the moderns, human progress will stop and the race will die. 
The result of this theory is to furnish every oppressor with an argument to 
calm the qualms of conscience. Men are not lacking, who, posing as 
philosophers, want to kill out all wicked and incompetent persons (they are, 
of course, the only judges of competency) and thus preserve the human race! 
But the great ancient evolutionist, Patanjali, declares that the true secret of 
evolution is the manifestation of the perfection which is already in every 
being; that this perfection has been barred and the infinite tide behind is 
struggling to express itself. These struggles and competitions are but the 
results of our ignorance, because we do not know the proper way to unlock 
the gate and let the water in. This infinite tide behind must express itself; it 
is the cause of all manifestation.

Competitions for life or sex - gratification are only momentary, unnecessary, 
extraneous effects, caused by ignorance. Even when all competition has 
ceased, this perfect nature behind will make us go forward until everyone 
has become perfect. Therefore there is no reason to believe that competition 
is necessary to progress. In the animal the man was suppressed, but as soon 
as the door was opened, out rushed man. So in man there is the potential 
god, kept in by the locks and bars of ignorance. When knowledge breaks 
these bars, the god becomes manifest. 

4. From egoism alone proceed the created minds.

The theory of Karma is that we suffer for our good or bad deeds, and the 
whole scope of philosophy is to reach the glory of man. All the scriptures 
sing the glory of man, of the soul, and then, in the same breath, they preach 
Karma. A good deed brings such a result, and a bad deed such another, but if 
the soul can be acted upon by a good or a bad deed, the soul amounts to 
nothing. Bad deeds put a bar to the manifestation of the nature of the 
Purusha; good deeds take the obstacles off, and the glory of the Purusha 

141

Raja Yoga

becomes manifest. The Purusha itself is never changed. Whatever you do 
never destroys your own glory, your own nature, because the soul cannot be 
acted upon by anything, only a veil is spread before it, hiding its perfection.

With a view to exhausting their Karma quickly, Yogis create Kaya - vyuha, 
or groups of bodies, in which to work it out. For all these bodies they create 
minds from egoism. These are called "created minds", in contradistinction to 
their original minds. 

5. Though the activities of the different created minds are various, the 
one original mind is the controller of them all.

These different minds, which act in these different bodies are called made - 
minds, and the bodies, made - bodies; that is, manufactured bodies and 
minds. Matter and mind are like two inexhaustible storehouses. When you 
become a Yogi, you learn the secret of their control. It was yours all the 
time, but you had forgotten it. When you become a Yogi, you recollect it. 
Then you can do anything with it, manipulate it in every way you like. The 
material out of which a manufactured mind is created is the very same 
material which is used for the macrocosm. It is not that mind is one thing 
and matter another, they are different aspects of the same thing. Asmita, 
egoism, is the material, the fine state of existence out of which these made - 
minds and made - bodies of the Yogi are manufactured. Therefore, when the 
Yogi has found the secret of these energies of nature, he can manufacture 
any number of bodies or minds out of the substance known as egoism. 

6. Among the various Chittas, that which is attained by Samadhi is 
desireless.

Among all the various minds that we see in various men, only that mind 
which has attained to Samadhi, perfect concentration, is the highest. A man 
who has attained certain powers through medicines, or through words, or 
through mortifications, still has desires, but that man who has attained to 
Samadhi through concentration is alone free from all desires. 

7. Works are neither black nor white for the Yogis; for others they are 
threefold -- black, white, and mixed.

142

Raja Yoga

When the Yogi has attained perfection, his actions, and the Karma produced 
by those actions, do not bind him, because he did not desire them. He just 
works on; he works to do good, and he does good, but does not care for the 
result, and it will not come to him. But, for ordinary men, who have not 
attained to the highest state, works are of three kinds, black (evil actions), 
white (good actions), and mixed. 

8. From these threefold works are manifested in each state only those 
desires (which are) fitting to that state alone. (The others are held in 
abeyance for the time being.)

Suppose I have made the three kinds of Karma, good, bad, and mixed, and 
suppose I die and become a god in heaven. The desires in a god body are not 
the same as the desires in a human body; the god body neither eats nor 
drinks. What becomes of my past unworked Karmas which produce as their 
effect the desire to eat and drink? Where would these Karmas go when I 
become a god? The answer is that desires can only manifest themselves in 
proper environments. Only those desires will come out for which the 
environment is fitted; the rest will remain stored up. In this life we have 
many godly desires, many human desires, many animal desires. If I take a 
god body, only the good desires will come up, because for them the 
environments are suitable. And if I take an animal body, only the animal 
desires will come up, and the good desires will wait. What does this show? 
That by means of environment we can check these desires. Only that Karma 
which is suited to and fitted for the environments will come out. This shows 
that the power of environment is the great check to control even Karma 
itself. 

9. There is consecutiveness in desires, even though separated by species, 
space, and time, there being identification of memory and impressions.

Experiences becoming fine become impressions; impressions revivified 
become memory. The word memory here includes unconscious co - 
ordination of past experiences, reduced to impressions, with present 
conscious action. In each body, the group of impressions acquired in a 
similar body only becomes the cause of action in that body. The experiences 
of a dissimilar body are held in abeyance. Each body acts as if it were a 

143

Raja Yoga

descendant of a series of bodies of that species only; thus, consecutiveness 
of desires is not to be broken. 

10. Thirst for happiness being eternal, desires are without beginning.

All experience is preceded by desire for happiness. There was no beginning 
of experience, as each fresh experience is built upon the tendency generated 
by past experience; therefore desire is without beginning. 

11. Being held together by cause, effect, support, and objects, in the 
absence of these is its absence.

Desires are held together by cause and effect; if a desire has been raised, it 
does not die without producing its effect. Then, again, the mind - stuff is the 
great storehouse, the support of all past desires reduced to Samskara form; 
until they have worked themselves out, they will not die. Moreover, so long 
as the senses receive the external objects, fresh desires will arise. If it be 
possible to get rid of the cause, effect, support, and objects of desire, then 
alone it will vanish. 

12. The past and future exist in their own nature, qualities having 
different ways.

The idea is that existence never comes out of non - existence. The past and 
future, though not existing in a manifested form, yet exist in a fine form. 

13. They are manifested or fine, being of the nature of the Gunas.

The Gunas are the three substances, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, whose gross 
state is the sensible universe. Past and future arise from the different modes 
of manifestation of these Gunas. 

14. The unity in things is from the unity in changes.

Though there are three substances, their changes being co - ordinated, all 
objects have their unity. 

144

Raja Yoga

15. Since perception and desire vary with regard to the same object, 
mind and object are of different nature.

That is, there is an objective world independent of our minds. This is a 
refutation of Buddhistic Idealism. Since different people look at the same 
thing differently, it cannot be a mere imagination of any particular 
individual. 

16. Things are known or unknown to the mind, being dependent on the 
colouring which they give to the mind. (Sanskrit) 17. The states of the 
mind are always known, because the lord of the mind, the Purusha, is 
unchangeable.

The whole gist of this theory is that the universe is both mental and material. 
Both of these are in a continuous state of flux. What is this book? It is a 
combination of molecules in constant change. One lot is going out, and 
another coming in; it is a whirlpool, but what makes the unity? What makes 
it the same book? The changes are rhythmical; in harmonious order they are 
sending impressions to my mind, and these pieced together make a 
continuous picture, although the parts are continuously changing. Mind itself 
is continuously changing. 

17. The object cannot be said to be dependent on a single mind. There 
being no proof of its existence, it would then become non-existent.

If the perception of an object were the only criterion of its existence, then 
when the mind is absorbed in anything or is in Samadhi, it would not be 
perceived by anybody and might as well be said to be non-existent. This is 
an undesirable conclusion.--Ed.

The mind and body are like two layers in the same substance, moving at 
different rates of speed. Relatively, one being slower and the other quicker, 
we can distinguish between the two motions. For instance, a train is in 
motion, and a carriage is moving alongside it. It is possible to find the 
motion of both these to a certain extent. But still something else is 
necessary. Motion can only be perceived when there is something else which 
is not moving. But when two or three things are relatively moving, we first 

145

Raja Yoga

perceive the motion of the faster one, and then that of the slower ones. How 
is the mind to perceive? It is also in a flux. Therefore another thing is 
necessary which moves more slowly, then you must get to something in 
which the motion is still slower, and so on, and you will find no end. 
Therefore logic compels you to stop somewhere. You must complete the 
series by knowing something which never changes. Behind this never - 
ending chain of motion is the Purusha, the changeless, the colourless, the 
pure. All these impressions are merely reflected upon it, as a magic lantern 
throws images upon a screen, without in any way tarnishing it. 

18. The mind is not self - luminous, being an object.

Tremendous power is manifested everywhere in nature, but it is not self - 
luminous, not essentially intelligent. The Purusha alone is self - luminous, 
and gives its light to everything. It is the power of the Purusha that is 
percolating through all matter and force. 

19. From its being unable to cognise both at the same time.

If the mind were self - luminous it would be able to cognise itself and its 
objects at the same time, which it cannot. When it cognises the object, it 
cannot reflect on itself. Therefore the Purusha is self - luminous, and the 
mind is not. 

20. Another cognising mind being assumed, there will be no end to such 
assumptions, and confusion of memory will be the result.

Let us suppose there is another mind which cognises the ordinary mind, then 
there will have to be still another to cognise the former, and so there will be 
no end to it. It will result in confusion of memory, there will be no 
storehouse of memory. 

21. The essence of knowledge (the Purusha) being unchangeable, when 
the mind takes its form, it becomes conscious.

Patanjali says this to make it more clear that knowledge is not a quality of 
the Purusha. When the mind comes near the Purusha it is reflected, as it 

146

Raja Yoga

were, upon the mind, and the mind, for the time being, becomes knowing 
and seems as if it were itself the Purusha. 

22. Coloured by the seer and the seen the mind is able to understand 
everything.

On one side of the mind the external world, the seen, is being reflected, and 
on the other, the seer is being reflected. Thus comes the power of all 
knowledge to the mind. 

23. The mind, though variegated by innumerable desires, acts for 
another (the Purusha), because it acts in combination.

The mind is a compound of various things and therefore it cannot work for 
itself. Everything that is a combination in this world has some object for that 
combination, some third thing for which this combination is going on. So 
this combination of the mind is for the Purusha. 

24. For the discriminating, the perception of the mind as Atman ceases.

Through discrimination the Yogi knows that the Purusha is not mind. 

25. Then, bent on discriminating, the mind attains the previous state of 
Kaivalya (isolation).

Thus the practice of Yoga leads to discriminating power, to clearness of 
vision. The veil drops from the eyes, and we see things as they are. We find 
that nature is a compound, and is showing the panorama for the Purusha, 
who is the witness; that nature is not the Lord, that all the combinations of 
nature are simply for the sake of showing these phenomena to the Purusha, 
the enthroned king within. When discrimination comes by long practice, fear 
ceases, and the mind attains isolation. 

26. The thoughts that arise as obstructions to that are from impressions.

All the various ideas that arise, making us believe that we require something 
external to make us happy, are obstructions to that perfection. The Purusha 
is happiness and blessedness by its own nature. But that knowledge is 

147

Raja Yoga

covered over by past impressions. These impressions have to work 
themselves out. 

27. Their destruction is in the same manner as of ignorance, egoism, 
etc., as said before (II.10).

28. Even when arriving at the right discriminating knowledge of the 
essences, he who gives up the fruits, unto him comes, as the result of 
perfect discrimination, the Samadhi called the cloud of virtue.

When the Yogi has attained to this discrimination, all the powers mentioned 
in the last chapter come to him, but the true Yogi rejects them all. Unto him 
comes a peculiar knowledge, a particular light, called the Dharma - megha, 
the cloud of virtue. All the great prophets of the world whom history has 
recorded had this. They had found the whole foundation of knowledge 
within themselves. Truth to them had become real. Peace and calmness, and 
perfect purity became their own nature, after they had given up the vanities 
of powers. 

29. From that comes cessation of pain and works.

When that cloud of virtue has come, then no more is there fear of falling, 
nothing can drag the Yogi down. No more will there be evils for him. No 
more pains. 

30. The knowledge, bereft of covering and impurities, becoming infinite, 
the knowable becomes small.

Knowledge itself is there; its covering is gone. One of the Buddhistic 
scriptures defines what is meant by the Buddha (which is the name of a 
state) as infinite knowledge, infinite as the sky. Jesus attained to that and 
became the Christ. All of you will attain to that state. Knowledge becoming 
infinite, the knowable becomes small. The whole universe, with all its 
objects of knowledge, becomes as nothing before the Purusha. The ordinary 
man thinks himself very small, because to him the knowable seems to be 
infinite. 

148

Raja Yoga

31. Then are finished the successive transformations of the qualities, 
they having attained the end.

Then all these various transformations of the qualities, which change from 
species to species, cease for ever. 

32. The changes that exist in relation to moments and which are 
perceived at the other end (at the end of a series) are succession.

Patanjali here defines the word succession, the changes that exist in relation 
to moments. While I think, many moments pass, and with each moment 
there is a change of idea, but I only perceive these changes at the end of a 
series. This is called succession, but for the mind that has realised 
omnipresence there is no succession. Everything has become present for it; 
to it the present alone exists, the past and future are lost. Time stands 
controlled, all knowledge is there in one second. Everything is known like a 
flash. 

33. The resolution in the inverse order of the qualities, bereft of any 
motive of action for the Purusha, is Kaivalya, or it is the establishment 
of the power of knowledge in its own nature.

Nature's task is done, this unselfish task which our sweet nurse, nature, had 
imposed upon herself. She gently took the self - forgetting soul by the hand, 
as it were, and showed him all the experiences in the universe, all 
manifestations, bringing him higher and higher through various bodies, till 
his lost glory came back, and he remembered his own nature. Then the kind 
mother went back the same way she came, for others who also have lost 
their way in the trackless desert of life. And thus is she working, without 
beginning and without end. And thus through pleasure and pain, through 
good and evil, the infinite river of souls is flowing into the ocean of 
perfection, of self - realisation.

Glory unto those who have realised their own nature. May their blessing be 
on us all!

References

149

Raja Yoga

1. The causes are the "pain - bearing obstructions" (II.3) and actions 
(IV.7), and the effects are "species, life, and experience of pleasure 
and pain" (II.13).--Ed.
2. There is an additional aphorism here in some editions:
3. There is another reading--(Sanskrit). The meaning then would be: 
"Then the mind becomes deep in discrimination and gravitates 
towards Kaivalya."--Ed.

150

Raja Yoga

Appendix - References To Yoga
Shvetashvatara Upanishad - Chapter II

6. Where the fire is rubbed, where the air is controlled, where the Soma 
flows over, there a (perfect) mind is created.

8. Placing the body in a straight posture, with the chest, the throat, and the 
head held erect, making the organs enter the mind, the sage crosses all the 
fearful currents by means of the raft of Brahman.

9. The man of well - regulated endeavours controls the Prana; and when it 
has become quieted, breathes out through the nostrils. The persevering sage 
holds his mind as a charioteer holds the restive horses.

10. In (lonely) places as mountain caves where the floor is even, free of 
pebbles, fire, or sand, where there are no disturbing noises from men or 
waterfalls, in auspicious places helpful to the mind and pleasing to the eyes. 
Yoga is to be practised (mind is to be joined).

11. Like snowfall, smoke, sun, wind, fire, firefly, lightning, crystal, moon, 
these forms, coming before, gradually manifest the Brahman in Yoga.

12. When the perceptions of Yoga, arising from earth, water, light, fire, 
ether, have taken place, then Yoga has begun. Unto him does not come 
disease, nor old age, nor death, who has got a body made up of the fire of 
Yoga.

13. The first signs of entering Yoga are lightness, health, non - covetousness, 
clearness of complexion, a beautiful voice, an agreeable odour in the body, 
and scantiness of excretions.

14. As gold or silver, first covered with earth, and then cleaned, shines full 
of light, so the embodied man seeing the truth of the Atman as one, attains 
the goal and becomes sorrowless.

151

Raja Yoga

Yajnavalkya quoted by Shankara [1]

"After practising the postures as desired, according to rules, then, O Gargi, 
the man who has conquered the posture will practise Pranayama.

"Seated in an easy posture, on a (deer or tiger) skin, placed on Kusha grass, 
worshipping Ganapati with fruits and sweetmeats, placing the right palm on 
the left, holding the throat and head in the same line, the lips closed and 
firm, facing the east or the north, the eyes fixed on the tip of the nose, 
avoiding too much food or fasting, the Nadis should be purified, without 
which the practice will be fruitless. Thinking of the (seed - word) 'Hum,' at 
the junction of Pingala and Ida (the right and the left nostrils), the Ida should 
be filled with external air in twelve Matras (seconds); then the Yogi 
meditates on fire in the same place with the world 'Rung,' and while 
meditating thus, slowly ejects the air through the Pingala (right nostril). 
Again filling in through the Pingala the air should be slowly ejected through 
the Ida, in the same way. This should be practised for three or four years, or 
three or four months, according to the directions of a Guru, in secret (alone 
in a room), in the early morning, at midday, in the evening, and at midnight 
(until) the nerves become purified. Lightness of body, clear complexion, 
good appetite, hearing of the Nada, are the signs of the purification of 
nerves. Then should be practised Pranayama composed of Rechaka 
(exhalation), Kumbhaka (retention), and Puraka (inhalation). Joining the 
Prana with the Apana is Pranayama. "In sixteen Matras filling the body from 
the head to the feet, in thirty - two Matras the Prana is to be thrown out, and 
with sixty - four the Kumbhaka should be made. "There is another 
Pranayama in which the Kumbhaka should first be made with sixty - four 
Matras, then the Prana should be thrown out with sixteen, and the body next 
filled with sixteen Matras. "By Pranayama impurities of the body are thrown 
out; by Dharana the impurities of the mind; by Pratyahara impurities of 
attachment; and by Samadhi is taken off everything that hides the lordship of 
the Soul."

152

Raja Yoga

Sankhya - Book III

29. By the achievement of meditation, there come to the pure one (the 
Purusha) all powers of nature.

30. Meditation is the removal of attachment.

31. It is perfected by the suppression of the modifications.

32. By Dharana, posture, and performance of one's duties, it is perfected.

33. Restraint of the Prana is by means of expulsion and retention.

34. Posture is that which is steady and easy.

36. Also by non - attachment and practice, meditation is perfected.

74. By reflection on the principles of nature, and by giving them up as "not 
It, not It," discrimination is perfected.

Sankhya - Book IV

3. Instruction is to be repeated.

5. As the hawk becomes unhappy if the food is taken away from him and 
happy if he gives it up himself (so he who gives up everything voluntarily is 
happy).

6. As the snake is happy in giving up his old skin.

8. That which is not a means of liberation is not to be thought of; it becomes 
a cause of bondage, as in the case of Bharata.

9. From the association of many things there is obstruction to meditation, 
through passion, aversion, etc., like the shell bracelets on the virgin's hand.

10. It is the same even in the case of two.

153

Raja Yoga

11. The renouncers of hope are happy, like the girl Pingala.

13. Although devotion is to be given to many institutes and teachers, the 
essence is to be taken from them all as the bee takes the essence from many 
flowers.

14. One whose mind has become concentrated like the arrowmaker's does 
not get his meditation disturbed.

15. Through transgression of the original rules there is non - attainment of 
the goal, as in other worldly things.

19. By continence, reverence, and devotion to Guru, success comes after a 
long time (as in the case of Indra).

20. There is no law as to time, as in the case of Vamadeva.

24. Or through association with one who has attained perfection.

27. Not by enjoyments is desire appeased even with sages (who have 
practised Yoga for long).

Sankhya - Book V

128. The Siddhis attained by Yoga are not to be denied like recovery 
through medicines etc.

Sankhya - Book VI

24. Any posture which is easy and steady is an Asana; there is no other rule.

154

Raja Yoga

Vyasa-Sutras - Chapter IV, Section I

7. Worship is possible in a sitting posture.

8. Because of meditation.

9. Because the meditating (person) is compared to the immovable earth.

10. Also because the Smritis say so.

11. There is no law of place; wherever the mind is concentrated, there 
worship should be performed.

These several extracts give an idea of what other systems of Indian 
Philosophy have to say upon Yoga.

References

1. In Svetashvatara Upanishad Bhashya.

155


